Human
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to: navigation, search
This article is about modern humans. For other human species, see Homo. For other uses, see Human (disambiguation).
"Homo sapiens" redirects here. For other uses, see Homo sapiens (disambiguation).
Page semi-protected

Human[1]
Temporal range: 0.195–0 Ma
Pre?
?
O
S
D
C
P
T
J
K
Pg
N
?
Pleistocene – Recent
Humans from Southeast Asia
Conservation status

Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[2]
Scientific classification e
Kingdom: 	Animalia
Phylum: 	Chordata
Class: 	Mammalia
Order: 	Primates
Family: 	Hominidae
Tribe: 	Hominini
Genus: 	Homo
Species: 	H. sapiens
Binomial name
Homo sapiens
Linnaeus, 1758
Subspecies

†Homo sapiens idaltu White et al., 2003
Homo sapiens sapiens
Range of Homo sapiens (green)
Synonyms
Species synonymy[1][show]

Humans (known taxonomically as Homo sapiens,[3][4] Latin for "wise man" or "knowing man")[5] are the only living species in the Homo genus. Anatomically modern humans originated in Africa about 200,000 years ago, reaching full behavioral modernity around 50,000 years ago.[6]

Humans have a highly developed brain and are capable of abstract reasoning, language, introspection, and problem solving. This mental capability, combined with an erect body carriage that frees the hands for manipulating objects, has allowed humans to make far greater use of tools than any other living species on Earth. Other higher-level thought processes of humans, such as self-awareness, rationality, and sapience,[7][8][9] are considered to be defining features of what constitutes a "person".[10]

Humans are uniquely adept at utilizing systems of communication for self-expression, the exchange of ideas, and organization. Humans create complex social structures composed of many cooperating and competing groups, from families and kinship networks, to nations. Social interactions between humans have established an extremely wide variety of values, social norms, and rituals, which together form the basis of human society. With individuals widespread in every continent except Antarctica, humans are a cosmopolitan species. As of November 2011, the human population was estimated by the United Nations Population Division to be about 7 billion,[11] and by the United States Census Bureau to be about 6.97 billion.[12]

Humans are noted for their desire to understand and influence their environment, seeking to explain and manipulate phenomena through science, philosophy, mythology, and religion. This natural curiosity has led to the development of advanced tools and skills, which are passed down culturally; humans are the only extant species known to build fires and cook their food, as well as the only known species to clothe themselves, and create and use numerous other technologies and arts. The study of humans is the scientific discipline of anthropology.
Contents

    1 Etymology
    2 History
        2.1 Evolution
        2.2 Paleolithic
        2.3 Transition to civilization
    3 Habitat and population
    4 Biology
        4.1 Anatomy
        4.2 Physiology
        4.3 Genetics
        4.4 Life cycle
        4.5 Diet
        4.6 Sleep
        4.7 Biological variation
            4.7.1 Race
    5 Psychology
        5.1 Consciousness and thought
        5.2 Motivation and emotion
    6 Society and culture
        6.1 Ethnicity
        6.2 Sexuality and love
        6.3 Gender roles
        6.4 Society, government, and politics
        6.5 Trade and economics
        6.6 War
        6.7 Material culture and technology
        6.8 Clothing, adornments, hair trimming, and body modifications
        6.9 Language
        6.10 Religion and spirituality
        6.11 Philosophy and self-reflection
        6.12 Science and mathematics
        6.13 Art, music, and literature
    7 See also
    8 References
    9 Further reading
    10 External links

Etymology
Further information: Man (word) and List of alternative names for the human species

The English adjective human is a Middle English loanword from Old French humain, ultimately from Latin humanus, the adjective form of homo "man". The word's use as a noun (with a plural: humans) dates to the 16th century.[13] The native English term man can refer to the species generally (a synonym for mankind), and could formerly refer to specific individuals of either sex. The latter use is now obsolete.[14] Generic uses of the term "man" are declining, in favor of reserving it for referring specifically to adult males. The word is from Proto-Germanic *mannaz, from a Proto-Indo-European (PIE) root *man-, a cognate to Sanskrit manu-.[citation needed]

The species binomial Homo sapiens was coined by Carl Linnaeus in his 18th century work Systema Naturae, and he himself is the lectotype specimen.[15] The generic name Homo is a learned 18th century derivation from Latin homo "man", ultimately "earthly being" (Old Latin hemo, a cognate to Old English guma "man", from PIE *d???emon-, meaning 'earth' or 'ground').[16] The species-name sapiens means "wise" or "sapient".
History
Evolution
Main article: Human evolution
Further information: Anthropology, Homo (genus), and Timeline of human evolution
Plesiadapis, the earliest known primate
Craniums
1. Gorilla 2. Australopithecus 3. Homo erectus 4. Neanderthal (La Chapelle aux Saints) 5. Steinheim Skull 6. Euhominid

Scientific study of human evolution is concerned, primarily, with the development of the genus Homo, but usually involves studying other hominids and hominines as well, such as Australopithecus. "Modern humans" are defined as the Homo sapiens species, of which the only extant subspecies is known as Homo sapiens sapiens. Homo sapiens idaltu (roughly translated as "elder wise human"), the other known subspecies, is now extinct.[17] Homo neanderthalensis, which became extinct 30,000 years ago, has sometimes been classified as a subspecies, "Homo sapiens neanderthalensis"; genetic studies now suggest that the functional DNA of modern humans and Neanderthals diverged 500,000 years ago.[18] More recent genetics suggest that modern humans mated with "at least two groups" of ancient humans: Neanderthals and Denisovans.[19] Nonetheless, the discovered specimens of the Homo rhodesiensis species have been classified by some as a subspecies, but this classification is not widely accepted.

Anatomically modern humans first appear in the fossil record in Africa about 195,000 years ago, and studies of molecular biology give evidence that the approximate time of divergence from the common ancestor of all modern human populations was 200,000 years ago.[20][21][22][23][24] The broad study of African genetic diversity headed by Dr. Sarah Tishkoff found the San people to express the greatest genetic diversity among the 113 distinct populations sampled, making them one of 14 "ancestral population clusters". The research also located the origin of modern human migration in south-western Africa, near the coastal border of Namibia and Angola.[25]

The evolutionary history of primates can be traced back 65 million years. Primates are one of the oldest of all surviving placental mammal groups. The oldest known primate-like mammal species (those of the genus Plesiadapis) come from North America, but inhabited Eurasia and Africa on a wide scale during the tropical conditions of the Paleocene and Eocene. Molecular evidence suggests that the last common ancestor between humans and the remaining great apes diverged 4–8 million years ago.[citation needed]

The orangutans were the first group to split from the line leading to the humans, then gorillas followed by chimpanzees (genus Pan). The functional portion of human DNA is approximately 98.4% identical to that of chimpanzees when comparing single-nucleotide polymorphisms (see human evolutionary genetics). Some studies put that as low as 94%. Therefore, the closest living relatives of humans are gorillas and chimpanzees, as they share a relatively recent common ancestor.[26]

Humans are probably most closely related to two chimpanzee species: the common chimpanzee and the bonobo.[26] Full genome sequencing has resulted in the conclusion that "after 6.5 [million] years of separate evolution, the differences between chimpanzee and human are ten times greater than those between two unrelated people and ten times less than those between rats and mice".[attribution needed] Current estimates of suggested concurrence between functional human and chimpanzee DNA sequences range between 95% and 99%.[27][28][29][30] Early estimates indicated that the human lineage may have diverged from that of chimpanzees about five million years ago, and from that of gorillas about eight million years ago. However, a hominid skull discovered in Chad in 2001, classified as Sahelanthropus tchadensis, is approximately seven million years old, and may be evidence of an earlier divergence.[31]

Human evolution is characterized by a number of important changes—morphological, developmental, physiological, and behavioral—that have taken place since the split between the last common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees. The first major morphological change was the evolution of a bipedal locomotor adaptation from an arboreal or semi-arboreal one,[32] with all its attendant adaptations (a valgus knee, low intermembral index (long legs relative to the arms), reduced upper-body strength).

The human species developed a much larger brain than that of other primates – typically 1,400 cm3 (85 cu in) in modern humans, over twice the size of that of a chimpanzee or gorilla. The pattern of human postnatal brain growth differs from that of other apes (heterochrony), and allows for extended periods of social learning and language acquisition in juvenile humans. Physical anthropologists argue that the differences between the structure of human brains and those of other apes are even more significant than their differences in size.[33][34]

Other significant morphological changes included the evolution of a power and precision grip,[35] a reduced masticatory system, a reduction of the canine tooth, and the descent of the larynx and hyoid bone, making speech possible. An important physiological change in humans was the evolution of hidden estrus, or concealed ovulation, which may have coincided with the evolution of important behavioral changes, such as pair bonding. Another significant behavioral change was the development of material culture, with human-made objects becoming increasingly common and diversified over time. The relationship between all these changes is the subject of ongoing debate.[36][37]

The forces of natural selection have continued to operate on human populations, with evidence that certain regions of the genome display directional selection in the past 15,000 years.[38]
The hominoids are descendants of a common ancestor.
Paleolithic
	This section's factual accuracy may be compromised due to out-of-date information. Please help improve the article by updating it. There may be additional information on the talk page. (May 2012)
Further information: Recent African Origin, Archaic Homo sapiens, Upper Paleolithic, and Early human migrations
Artistic expression appeared in the Upper Paleolithic: The Venus of Dolní Vestonice figurine, one of the earliest known depictions of the human body, dates to approximately 29,000–25,000 BP (Gravettian).

Anatomically modern humans evolved from archaic Homo sapiens in Africa in the Middle Paleolithic, about 200,000 years ago. By the beginning of the Upper Paleolithic period (50,000 BP [Before Present]), full behavioral modernity, including language, music and other cultural universals had developed.

The out of Africa migration is estimated to have occurred about 70,000 years BP. Modern humans subsequently spread globally, replacing earlier hominids: they inhabited Eurasia and Oceania by 40,000 years BP, and the Americas at least 14,500 years BP.[39] A popular theory is that they displaced Homo neanderthalensis and other species descended from Homo erectus[40] (which had inhabited Eurasia as early as 2 million years ago) through more successful reproduction and competition for resources.[41] The exact manner or extent of the coexistence and interaction of these species is unknown and continues to be a controversial subject.[42]

Evidence from archaeogenetics accumulating since the 1990s has lent strong support to the "out-of-Africa" scenario, and has marginalized the competing multiregional hypothesis, which proposed that modern humans evolved, at least in part, from independent hominid populations.[43]

Geneticists Lynn Jorde and Henry Harpending of the University of Utah propose that the variation in human DNA is minute compared to that of other species.[44] They also propose that during the Late Pleistocene, the human population was reduced to a small number of breeding pairs – no more than 10,000, and possibly as few as 1,000 – resulting in a very small residual gene pool.[45] Various reasons for this hypothetical bottleneck have been postulated, one being the Toba catastrophe theory.[46]
Transition to civilization
Main articles: Neolithic Revolution and Cradle of Civilization
Further information: History of the world
The rise of agriculture, and domestication of animals, led to stable human settlements.
The path followed by humans in the course of history

Until c. 10,000 years ago, most humans lived as hunter-gatherers. They generally lived in small nomadic groups known as band societies. The advent of agriculture prompted the Neolithic Revolution, when access to food surplus led to the formation of permanent human settlements, the domestication of animals and the use of metal tools for the first time in history. Agriculture encouraged trade and cooperation, and led to complex society. Because of the significance of this date for human society, it is the epoch of the Holocene calendar or Human Era.

About 6,000 years ago, the first proto-states developed in Mesopotamia, Egypt's Nile Valley and the Indus Valleys. Military forces were formed for protection, and government bureaucracies for administration. States cooperated and competed for resources, in some cases waging wars. Around 2,000–3,000 years ago, some states, such as Persia, India, China, Rome, and Greece, developed through conquest into the first expansive empires. Ancient Greece was the seminal civilization that laid the foundations of Western culture, being the birthplace of Western philosophy, democracy, major scientific and mathematical advances, the Olympic Games, Western literature and historiography, as well as Western drama, including both tragedy and comedy.[47] Influential religions, such as Judaism, originating in West Asia, and Hinduism, a religious tradition that originated in South Asia, also rose to prominence at this time.

The late Middle Ages saw the rise of revolutionary ideas and technologies. In China, an advanced and urbanized society promoted innovations and sciences, such as printing and seed drilling. In India, major advancements were made in mathematics, philosophy, religion and metallurgy. The Islamic Golden Age saw major scientific advancements in Muslim empires. In Europe, the rediscovery of classical learning and inventions such as the printing press led to the Renaissance in the 14th and 15th centuries. Over the next 500 years, exploration and colonialism brought great parts of the world under European control, leading to later struggles for independence. The Scientific Revolution in the 17th century and the Industrial Revolution in the 18th–19th centuries promoted major innovations in transport, such as the railway and automobile; energy development, such as coal and electricity; and government, such as representative democracy and Communism.

With the advent of the Information Age at the end of the 20th century, modern humans live in a world that has become increasingly globalized and interconnected. As of 2010, almost 2 billion humans are able to communicate with each other via the Internet,[48] and 3.3 billion by mobile phone subscriptions.[49]

Although interconnection between humans has encouraged the growth of science, art, discussion, and technology, it has also led to culture clashes and the development and use of weapons of mass destruction. Human civilization has led to environmental destruction and pollution significantly contributing to the ongoing mass extinction of other forms of life called the holocene extinction event,[50] that may be further accelerated by global warming in the future.[51]
Habitat and population
Further information: Human migration, Demography, and World population
Humans often live in family-based social structures and create artificial shelter.

Early human settlements were dependent on proximity to water and, depending on the lifestyle, other natural resources used for subsistence, such as populations of animal prey for hunting and arable land for growing crops and grazing livestock. But humans have a great capacity for altering their habitats by means of technology, through irrigation, urban planning, construction, transport, manufacturing goods, deforestation and desertification. Deliberate habitat alteration is often done with the goals of increasing material wealth, increasing thermal comfort, improving the amount of food available, improving aesthetics, or improving ease of access to resources or other human settlements. With the advent of large-scale trade and transport infrastructure, proximity to these resources has become unnecessary, and in many places, these factors are no longer a driving force behind the growth and decline of a population. Nonetheless, the manner in which a habitat is altered is often a major determinant in population change.

Technology has allowed humans to colonize all of the continents and adapt to virtually all climates. Within the last century, humans have explored Antarctica, the ocean depths, and outer space, although large-scale colonization of these environments is not yet feasible. With a population of over six billion, humans are among the most numerous of the large mammals. Most humans (61%) live in Asia. The remainder live in the Americas (14%), Africa (14%), Europe (11%), and Oceania (0.5%).[citation needed]

Human habitation within closed ecological systems in hostile environments, such as Antarctica and outer space, is expensive, typically limited in duration, and restricted to scientific, military, or industrial expeditions. Life in space has been very sporadic, with no more than thirteen humans in space at any given time.[52] Between 1969 and 1972, two humans at a time spent brief intervals on the Moon. As of May 2012, no other celestial body has been visited by humans, although there has been a continuous human presence in space since the launch of the initial crew to inhabit the International Space Station on October 31, 2000.[53] However, other celestial bodies have been visited by human-made objects.

Since 1800, the human population has increased from one billion to over six billion.[54] In 2004, some 2.5 billion out of 6.3 billion people (39.7%) lived in urban areas, and this percentage is expected to continue to rise throughout the 21st century. In February 2008, the U.N. estimated that half the world's population will live in urban areas by the end of the year.[55] Problems for humans living in cities include various forms of pollution and crime,[56] especially in inner city and suburban slums.

Humans have had a dramatic effect on the environment. As humans are rarely preyed upon, they have been described as superpredators.[57] Currently, through land development, combustion of fossil fuels, and pollution, humans are thought to be the main contributor to global climate change.[58] If this continues at its current rate it is predicted that it will wipe out half of all species over the next century.[59][60]
See also: City, Town, Nomad, Camping, Farm, House, Watercraft, Infrastructure, Architecture, Building, and Engineering
Biology
Main article: Human biology
Anatomy
Main article: Human anatomy
Further information: Human physical appearance and Anatomically modern humans
Basic anatomical features of female and male humans. These models have had body hair and male facial hair removed and head hair trimmed.

Human body types vary substantially. Although body size is largely determined by genes, it is also significantly influenced by environmental factors such as diet and exercise. The average height of an adult human is about 1.5 to 1.8 m (5 to 6 feet) tall, although this varies significantly from place to place and depending on ethnic origin.[61] The average mass of an adult human is 54–64 kg (120–140 lbs) for females and 76–83 kg (168–183 lbs) for males.[62] Weight can also vary greatly (e.g. obesity). Unlike most other primates, humans are capable of fully bipedal locomotion, thus leaving their arms available for manipulating objects using their hands, aided especially by opposable thumbs.
Vitruvian Man, Leonardo da Vinci's image is often used as an implied symbol of the essential symmetry of the human body, and by extension, of the universe as a whole.

Although humans appear hairless compared to other primates, with notable hair growth occurring chiefly on the top of the head, underarms and pubic area, the average human has more hair follicles on his or her body than the average chimpanzee. The main distinction is that human hairs are shorter, finer, and less heavily pigmented than the average chimpanzee's, thus making them harder to see.[63]

The hue of human skin and hair is determined by the presence of pigments called melanins. Human skin hues can range from dark brown to pale pink. Human hair ranges from white to brown to red to most commonly black.[64] This depends on the amount of melanin (an effective sun blocking pigment) in the skin and hair, with hair melanin concentrations in hair fading with increased age, leading to grey or even white hair. Most researchers believe that skin darkening was an adaptation that evolved as a protection against ultraviolet solar radiation. However, more recently it has been argued that particular skin colors are an adaptation to balance folate, which is destroyed by ultraviolet radiation, and vitamin D, which requires sunlight to form.[65] The skin pigmentation of contemporary humans is geographically stratified, and in general correlates with the level of ultraviolet radiation. Human skin also has a capacity to darken (sun tanning) in response to exposure to ultraviolet radiation.[66][67] Humans tend to be physically weaker than other similarly sized primates, with young, conditioned male humans having been shown to be unable to match the strength of female orangutans, which are at least three times stronger.[68]

The construction of the human pelvis differs from other primates, as do the toes. As a result, humans are slower for short distances than most other animals, but are among the best long-distance runners in the animal kingdom.[69] Humans' thinner body hair and more productive sweat glands also help avoid heat exhaustion while running for long distances. For this reason persistence hunting was most likely a very successful strategy for early humans – in this method, prey is chased until it is literally exhausted. This may have also helped the early human Cro-Magnon population out-compete the Neanderthal population for food. The otherwise physically stronger Neanderthal would have much greater difficulty hunting in this way, and much more likely hunted larger game in close quarters. A trade-off for these advantages of the modern human pelvis is that childbirth is more difficult and dangerous.

The construction of modern human shoulders enabled throwing weapons, which also were much more difficult or even impossible for Neanderthal competitors to use effectively.[70]
Constituents of the human body in a person weighing 60 kg[71] Constituent 	Weight 	Weight
percentage 	Percentage
of atoms
Oxygen 	38.8 kg 	65 % 	25.5 %
Carbon 	10.9 kg 	18 % 	9.5 %
Hydrogen 	6.0 kg 	10 % 	63.0 %
Nitrogen 	1.9 kg 	3 % 	1.4 %
Other 	2.4 kg 	4 % 	0.6 %

The dental formula of Humans is the following: Upper: 2.1.2.3, lower: 2.1.2.3. Humans have proportionately shorter palates and much smaller teeth than other primates. They are the only primates to have short, relatively flush canine teeth. Humans have characteristically crowded teeth, with gaps from lost teeth usually closing up quickly in young individuals. Humans are gradually losing their wisdom teeth, with some individuals having them congenitally absent.[72]
Physiology
Main article: Human physiology

Human physiology is the science of the mechanical, physical, and biochemical functions of humans in good health, their organs, and the cells of which they are composed. The principal level of focus of physiology is at the level of organs and systems. Most aspects of human physiology are closely homologous to corresponding aspects of animal physiology, and animal experimentation has provided much of the foundation of physiological knowledge. Anatomy and physiology are closely related fields of study: anatomy, the study of form, and physiology, the study of function, are intrinsically tied and are studied in tandem as part of a medical curriculum.
Genetics
Main article: Human genetics

Humans are a eukaryotic species. Each diploid cell has two sets of 23 chromosomes, each set received from one parent. There are 22 pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes. By present estimates, humans have approximately 22,000 genes.[73] Like other mammals, humans have an XY sex-determination system, so that females have the sex chromosomes XX and males have XY. The X chromosome carries many genes not on the Y chromosome, which means that recessive diseases associated with X-linked genes, such as hemophilia, affect men more often than women.
Life cycle
A 10 mm human embryo at 5 weeks

As with other mammals, human reproduction takes place as internal fertilization by sexual intercourse. During this process, the erect penis of the male is inserted into the female's vagina until the male ejaculates semen, which contains sperm. The sperm travels through the vagina and cervix into the uterus or Fallopian tubes for fertilization of the ovum. Upon fertilization and implantation, gestation then occurs within the female's uterus.

The zygote divides inside the female's uterus to become an embryo, which over a period of thirty-eight weeks (9 months) of gestation becomes a fetus. After this span of time, the fully grown fetus is birthed from the woman's body and breathes independently as an infant for the first time. At this point, most modern cultures recognize the baby as a person entitled to the full protection of the law, though some jurisdictions extend various levels of personhood earlier to human fetuses while they remain in the uterus.

Compared with other species, human childbirth is dangerous. Painful labors lasting twenty-four hours or more are not uncommon and sometimes lead to the death of the mother, or the child.[74] This is because of both the relatively large fetal head circumference (for housing the brain) and the mother's relatively narrow pelvis (a trait required for successful bipedalism, by way of natural selection).[75][76] The chances of a successful labor increased significantly during the 20th century in wealthier countries with the advent of new medical technologies. In contrast, pregnancy and natural childbirth remain hazardous ordeals in developing regions of the world, with maternal death rates approximately 100 times greater than in developed countries.[77]

In developed countries, infants are typically 3–4 kg (6–9 pounds) in weight and 50–60 cm (20–24 inches) in height at birth.[78] However, low birth weight is common in developing countries, and contributes to the high levels of infant mortality in these regions.[79] Helpless at birth, humans continue to grow for some years, typically reaching sexual maturity at 12 to 15 years of age. Females continue to develop physically until around the age of 18, whereas male development continues until around age 21. The human life span can be split into a number of stages: infancy, childhood, adolescence, young adulthood, adulthood and old age. The lengths of these stages, however, have varied across cultures and time periods. Compared to other primates, humans experience an unusually rapid growth spurt during adolescence, where the body grows 25% in size. Chimpanzees, for example, grow only 14%, with no pronounced spurt.[80] The presence of the growth spurt is probably necessary to keep children physically small until they are psychologically mature. Humans are one of the few species in which females undergo menopause. It has been proposed that menopause increases a woman's overall reproductive success by allowing her to invest more time and resources in her existing offspring and/or their children (the grandmother hypothesis), rather than by continuing to bear children into old age.[81][82]

There are significant differences in life expectancy around the world. The developed world is generally aging, with the median age around 40 years. In the developing world the median age is between 15 and 20 years. Life expectancy at birth in Hong Kong is 84.8 years for a female and 78.9 for a male, while in Swaziland, primarily because of AIDS, it is 31.3 years for both sexes.[83] While one in five Europeans is 60 years of age or older, only one in twenty Africans is 60 years of age or older.[84] The number of centenarians (humans of age 100 years or older) in the world was estimated by the United Nations at 210,000 in 2002.[85] At least one person, Jeanne Calment, is known to have reached the age of 122 years;[86] higher ages have been claimed but they are not well substantiated. Worldwide, there are 81 men aged 60 or older for every 100 women of that age group, and among the oldest, there are 53 men for every 100 women.

    A selection of different humans at various stages of the human life cycle

    Girl (before puberty)

    Woman of reproductive age

    Older woman (after menopause)

    Boy (before puberty)

    Adult man

    Elderly man

Diet
Main article: Human nutrition

Humans are omnivorous, capable of consuming a wide variety of plant and animal material.[87][88] Varying with available food sources in regions of habitation, and also varying with cultural and religious norms, human groups have adopted a range of diets, from purely vegetarian to primarily carnivorous. In some cases, dietary restrictions in humans can lead to deficiency diseases; however, stable human groups have adapted to many dietary patterns through both genetic specialization and cultural conventions to use nutritionally balanced food sources.[89] The human diet is prominently reflected in human culture, and has led to the development of food science.

Until the development of agriculture approximately 10,000 years ago, Homo sapiens employed a hunter-gatherer method as their sole means of food collection. This involved combining stationary food sources (such as fruits, grains, tubers, and mushrooms, insect larvae and aquatic mollusks) with wild game, which must be hunted and killed in order to be consumed.[90] It has been proposed that members of H. sapiens have used fire to prepare and cook food since the time of their divergence from Homo rhodesiensis (which itself had previously speciated from Homo erectus).[91] Around ten thousand years ago, humans developed agriculture,[92] which substantially altered their diet. This change in diet may also have altered human biology; with the spread of dairy farming providing a new and rich source of food, leading to the evolution of the ability to digest lactose in some adults.[93][94] Agriculture led to increased populations, the development of cities, and because of increased population density, the wider spread of infectious diseases. The types of food consumed, and the way in which they are prepared, has varied widely by time, location, and culture.

In general, humans can survive for two to eight weeks without food, depending on stored body fat. Survival without water is usually limited to three or four days. About 36 million humans die every year from causes directly or indirectly related to hunger.[95] Childhood malnutrition is also common and contributes to the global burden of disease.[96] However global food distribution is not even, and obesity among some human populations has increased rapidly, leading to health complications and increased mortality in some developed, and a few developing countries. Worldwide over one billion people are obese,[97] while in the United States 35% of people are obese, leading to this being described as an "obesity epidemic".[98] Obesity is caused by consuming more calories than are expended, so excessive weight gain is usually caused by a combination of an energy-dense high fat diet and insufficient exercise.[97]
Sleep
Main article: Sleep

Humans are generally diurnal. The average sleep requirement is between seven and nine hours per day for an adult and nine to ten hours per day for a child; elderly people usually sleep for six to seven hours. Experiencing less sleep than this is common in modern societies; this sleep deprivation can have negative effects. A sustained restriction of adult sleep to four hours per day has been shown to correlate with changes in physiology and mental state, including fatigue, aggression, and bodily discomfort.[99]
Biological variation
Main article: Human genetic variation

Most current genetic and archaeological evidence supports a recent single origin of modern humans in East Africa[100] with first migrations placed at 60,000 years ago. Current genetic studies have demonstrated that humans on the African continent are the most genetically diverse.[101] However, compared to the other great apes, human gene sequences are remarkably homogeneous.[102]

Nonetheless, there is important biological variation in the human species - with traits such as skin color, eye color, hair color and texture, height and built, and cranial features varying clinally across the globe. Those aspects of genetic variation that gives clue to human evolutionary history, or which are relevant for medical research have received particular attention. For example the genes that cause adult humans to be able to digest lactose are present in high frequencies in population that have long histories of cattle domestication, suggesting natural selection having favored that gene in populations that depend on cow milk. Some hereditary diseases such as Sickle cell anemia are frequent in populations from areas in which Malaria has been endemic throughout history - it is believed that the same gene that causes increased resistance to Malaria among those who are unaffected carriers of the gene. Similarly populations that have inhabited specific climates such as arctic or tropical regions or high altitudes, tend to have developed specific phenotypes that are beneficial for conserving energy in those environments - short stature and stocky built in cold regions, tall and lanky in hot regions and with high lung capacities in high altitudes. Similarly variation in skincolor varies clinally with darker colors around the equator where the added protection from the sun is thought to gives an evolutionary advantage, and lighter skin tones closer to the poles where there is less sunlight and the lighter colored skin improves Vitamin D synthesis.

Today it is possible to determine, by genetic analysis, the geographic ancestry of a person and the degree of ancestry from each region. Such analyses can pinpoint the migrational history of a persons ancestors with a high degree of accuracy. Often, due to practices of group endogamy, allele frequencies cluster locally around kin groups and and lineages, or by national, cultural or linguistic boundaries, giving a detailed degree of correlation between genetic clusters and population groups when considering many alleles simultaneously.

Psychology
Main article: Psychology
Further information: Human brain and Mind

The human brain, the focal point of the central nervous system in humans, controls the peripheral nervous system. In addition to controlling "lower", involuntary, or primarily autonomic activities such as respiration and digestion, it is also the locus of "higher" order functioning such as thought, reasoning, and abstraction.[119] These cognitive processes constitute the mind, and, along with their behavioral consequences, are studied in the field of psychology.

Generally regarded as more capable of these higher order activities, the human brain is believed to be more "intelligent" in general than that of any other known species. While some non-human species are capable of creating structures and using simple tools—mostly through instinct and mimicry—human technology is vastly more complex, and is constantly evolving and improving through time.

Although humans are vastly more advanced than many species in cognitive abilities, most of these abilities are known in primitive form among other species. Modern anthropology has tended to bear out Darwin's proposition that "the difference in mind between man and the higher animals, great as it is, certainly is one of degree and not of kind".[120]
Consciousness and thought
Main articles: Consciousness and Cognition

Humans are one of only several species known to pass the mirror test.[121] Most human children will pass the mirror test at 18 months old.[122] However, the usefulness of this test as a true test of consciousness has been disputed, and this may be a matter of degree rather than a sharp divide. Monkeys have been trained to apply abstract rules in tasks.[123]

The human brain perceives the external world through the senses, and each individual human is influenced greatly by his or her experiences, leading to subjective views of existence and the passage of time. Humans are variously said to possess consciousness, self-awareness, and a mind, which correspond roughly to the mental processes of thought. These are said to possess qualities such as self-awareness, sentience, sapience, and the ability to perceive the relationship between oneself and one's environment. The extent to which the mind constructs or experiences the outer world is a matter of debate, as are the definitions and validity of many of the terms used above. The philosopher of cognitive science Daniel Dennett, for example, argues that there is no such thing as a narrative center called the "mind", but that instead there is simply a collection of sensory inputs and outputs: different kinds of "software" running in parallel.[124] Psychologist B.F. Skinner argued that the mind is an explanatory fiction that diverts attention from environmental causes of behavior,[125] and that what are commonly seen as mental processes may be better conceived of as forms of covert verbal behavior.[126][127]

Humans study the more physical aspects of the mind and brain, and by extension of the nervous system, in the field of neurology, the more behavioral in the field of psychology, and a sometimes loosely defined area between in the field of psychiatry, which treats mental illness and behavioral disorders. Psychology does not necessarily refer to the brain or nervous system, and can be framed purely in terms of phenomenological or information processing theories of the mind. Increasingly, however, an understanding of brain functions is being included in psychological theory and practice, particularly in areas such as artificial intelligence, neuropsychology, and cognitive neuroscience.

The nature of thought is central to psychology and related fields. Cognitive psychology studies cognition, the mental processes' underlying behavior. It uses information processing as a framework for understanding the mind. Perception, learning, problem solving, memory, attention, language and emotion are all well researched areas as well. Cognitive psychology is associated with a school of thought known as cognitivism, whose adherents argue for an information processing model of mental function, informed by positivism and experimental psychology. Techniques and models from cognitive psychology are widely applied and form the mainstay of psychological theories in many areas of both research and applied psychology. Largely focusing on the development of the human mind through the life span, developmental psychology seeks to understand how people come to perceive, understand, and act within the world and how these processes change as they age. This may focus on intellectual, cognitive, neural, social, or moral development.

Some philosophers divide consciousness into phenomenal consciousness, which is experience itself, and access consciousness, which is the processing of the things in experience.[128] Phenomenal consciousness is the state of being conscious, such as when they say "I am conscious." Access consciousness is being conscious of something in relation to abstract concepts, such as when one says "I am conscious of these words." Various forms of access consciousness include awareness, self-awareness, conscience, stream of consciousness, Husserl's phenomenology, and intentionality. The concept of phenomenal consciousness, in modern history, according to some, is closely related to the concept of qualia. Social psychology links sociology with psychology in their shared study of the nature and causes of human social interaction, with an emphasis on how people think towards each other and how they relate to each other. The behavior and mental processes, both human and non-human, can be described through animal cognition, ethology, evolutionary psychology, and comparative psychology as well. Human ecology is an academic discipline that investigates how humans and human societies interact with both their natural environment and the human social environment.
Motivation and emotion
Main articles: Motivation and Emotion

Motivation is the driving force of desire behind all deliberate actions of humans. Motivation is based on emotion—specifically, on the search for satisfaction (positive emotional experiences), and the avoidance of conflict. Positive and negative is defined by the individual brain state, which may be influenced by social norms: a person may be driven to self-injury or violence because his brain is conditioned to create a positive response to these actions. Motivation is important because it is involved in the performance of all learned responses. Within psychology, conflict avoidance and the libido are seen to be primary motivators. Within economics, motivation is often seen to be based on incentives; these may be financial, moral, or coercive. Religions generally posit divine or demonic influences.

Happiness, or the state of being happy, is a human emotional condition. The definition of happiness is a common philosophical topic. Some people might define it as the best condition that a human can have—a condition of mental and physical health. Others define it as freedom from want and distress; consciousness of the good order of things; assurance of one's place in the universe or society.

Emotion has a significant influence on, or can even be said to control, human behavior, though historically many cultures and philosophers have for various reasons discouraged allowing this influence to go unchecked. Emotional experiences perceived as pleasant, such as love, admiration, or joy, contrast with those perceived as unpleasant, like hate, envy, or sorrow. There is often a distinction made between refined emotions that are socially learned and survival oriented emotions, which are thought to be innate. Human exploration of emotions as separate from other neurological phenomena is worthy of note, particularly in cultures where emotion is considered separate from physiological state. In some cultural medical theories emotion is considered so synonymous with certain forms of physical health that no difference is thought to exist. The Stoics believed excessive emotion was harmful, while some Sufi teachers felt certain extreme emotions could yield a conceptual perfection, what is often translated as ecstasy.

In modern scientific thought, certain refined emotions are considered a complex neural trait innate in a variety of domesticated and non-domesticated mammals. These were commonly developed in reaction to superior survival mechanisms and intelligent interaction with each other and the environment; as such, refined emotion is not in all cases as discrete and separate from natural neural function as was once assumed. However, when humans function in civilized tandem, it has been noted that uninhibited acting on extreme emotion can lead to social disorder and crime.
Society and culture
Human society statistics
World population 	7 billion
Population density[citation needed] 	12.7 per km² (4.9 mi²) by total area
43.6 per km² (16.8 mi²) by land area
Largest agglomerations[citation needed] 	Beijing, Bogotá, Buenos Aires, Cairo, Delhi, Dhaka, Guangzhou, Istanbul, Jakarta, Karachi, Kinshasa, Kolkata, Lagos, Lima, London, Los Angeles, Manila, Mexico City, Moscow, Mumbai, New York City, Osaka, Paris, Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, Seoul, Shanghai, Shenzhen, Tehran, Tianjin, Tokyo, Wuhan
Most widely spoken languages[129] 	Mandarin Chinese, English, Spanish, Arabic, Hindi, Bengali, Portuguese, Russian, Japanese, German, Javanese, Punjabi, Telugu, Vietnamese, French, Marathi, Turkish, Korean, Tamil, Italian, Urdu, Indonesian
Most popular religions[130] 	Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism, Judaism, Baha'i
GDP (nominal)[citation needed] 	$36,356,240 million USD
($5,797 USD per capita)
GDP (PPP)[citation needed] 	$51,656,251 million IND
($8,236 per capita)
Main articles: Culture and Society

Humans are social beings. In comparisons with animalia, humans are regarded like the primates for their social qualities. But beyond any other creature, humans are adept at utilizing systems of communication for self-expression, the exchange of ideas, and organization, and as such have created complex social structures composed of many cooperating and competing groups. Human groups range from families to nations. Social interactions between humans have established an extremely wide variety of values, social norms, and rituals, which together form the basis of human society.

Culture is defined here as patterns of complex symbolic behavior, i.e. all behavior that is not innate but which has to be learned through social interaction with others; such as the use of distinctive material and symbolic systems, including language, ritual, social organization, traditions, beliefs and technology.
Ethnicity

Ethnic groups are defined by linguistic, cultural, ancestral, national or regional ties. Identification with an ethnic group is usually based on kinship and descent. Race and ethnicity are among major factors in social identity giving rise to various forms of identity politics, for example racism.
Sexuality and love
Main articles: Love and Human sexuality

Human sexuality, besides ensuring biological reproduction, has important social functions: it creates physical intimacy, bonds, and hierarchies among individuals; and in a hedonistic sense to the enjoyment of activity involving sexual gratification. Sexual desire, or libido, is experienced as a bodily urge, often accompanied by strong emotions such as love, ecstasy, and jealousy. The extreme importance of sexuality in the human species can be seen in a number of physical features, among them hidden ovulation, the evolution of external scrotum and penis suggesting sperm competition, the absence of an os penis, permanent secondary sexual characteristics, the forming of pair bonds based on sexual attraction as a common social structure and sexual ability in females outside of ovulation–human females do not have a distinct or visible estrus. These adaptations indicate that the importance of sexuality in humans is on a par with that found in the Bonobo, and that the complex human sexual behavior has a long evolutionary history.[131]

Human choices in acting on sexuality are commonly influenced by cultural norms, which vary widely. Restrictions are often determined by religious beliefs or social customs. The pioneering researcher Sigmund Freud believed that humans are born polymorphously perverse, which means that any number of objects could be a source of pleasure. According to Freud, humans then pass through five stages of psychosexual development (and can fixate on any stage because of various traumas during the process). For Alfred Kinsey, another influential sex researcher, people can fall anywhere along a continuous scale of sexual orientation (with only small minorities fully heterosexual or homosexual). Recent studies of neurology and genetics suggest people may be born predisposed to various sexual tendencies.[132][133]
Gender roles
Main article: Gender role
See also: Gender

The sexual division of humans into male and female has been marked culturally by a corresponding division of roles, norms, practices, dress, behavior, rights, duties, privileges, status, and power. Cultural differences by gender have often been believed to have arisen naturally out of a division of reproductive labor; the biological fact that women give birth led to their further cultural responsibility for nurturing and caring for children. Gender roles have varied historically, and challenges to predominant gender norms have recurred in many societies.
Society, government, and politics
The United Nations complex in New York City, which houses one of the largest political organizations in the world
Main articles: Society, Government, Politics, and State (polity)

Society is the system of organizations and institutions arising from interaction between humans. A state is an organized political community occupying a definite territory, having an organized government, and possessing internal and external sovereignty. Recognition of the state's claim to independence by other states, enabling it to enter into international agreements, is often important to the establishment of its statehood. The "state" can also be defined in terms of domestic conditions, specifically, as conceptualized by Max Weber, "a state is a human community that (successfully) claims the monopoly of the 'legitimate' use of physical force within a given territory."[134]

Government can be defined as the political means of creating and enforcing laws; typically via a bureaucratic hierarchy. Politics is the process by which decisions are made within groups; this process often involves conflict as well as compromise. Although the term is generally applied to behavior within governments, politics is also observed in all human group interactions, including corporate, academic, and religious institutions. Many different political systems exist, as do many different ways of understanding them, and many definitions overlap. Examples of governments include monarchy, Communist state, military dictatorship, theocracy, and liberal democracy, the last of which is considered dominant today. All of these issues have a direct relationship with economics.
Trade and economics
Main articles: Trade and Economics
Buyers and sellers bargaining in a market

Trade is the voluntary exchange of goods and services, and is a form of economics. A mechanism that allows trade is called a market. The original form of trade was barter, the direct exchange of goods and services. Modern traders instead generally negotiate through a medium of exchange, such as money. As a result, buying can be separated from selling, or earning. The invention of money (and later credit, paper money and non-physical money) greatly simplified and promoted trade. Because of specialization and division of labor, most people concentrate on a small aspect of manufacturing or service, trading their labor for products. Trade exists between regions because different regions have an absolute or comparative advantage in the production of some tradable commodity, or because different regions' size allows for the benefits of mass production.

Economics is a social science which studies the production, distribution, trade, and consumption of goods and services. Economics focuses on measurable variables, and is broadly divided into two main branches: microeconomics, which deals with individual agents, such as households and businesses, and macroeconomics, which considers the economy as a whole, in which case it considers aggregate supply and demand for money, capital and commodities. Aspects receiving particular attention in economics are resource allocation, production, distribution, trade, and competition. Economic logic is increasingly applied to any problem that involves choice under scarcity or determining economic value.
War
Main article: War

War is a state of widespread conflict between states or other large groups of humans, which is characterized by the use of lethal violence between combatants and/or upon civilians. (Humans also engage in lesser conflicts, such as brawls, riots, revolts, and melees. A revolution may or may not involve warfare.) It is estimated that during the 20th century between 167 and 188 million humans died as a result of war.[135] A common perception of war is a series of military campaigns between at least two opposing sides involving a dispute over sovereignty, territory, resources, religion, or other issues. A war between internal elements of a state is a civil war.

There have been a wide variety of rapidly advancing tactics throughout the history of war, ranging from conventional war to asymmetric warfare to total war and unconventional warfare. Techniques include hand to hand combat, the use of ranged weapons, Naval warfare, and, more recently, air support. Military intelligence has often played a key role in determining victory and defeat. Propaganda, which often includes information, slanted opinion and disinformation, plays a key role in maintaining unity within a warring group, and/or sowing discord among opponents. In modern warfare, soldiers and combat vehicles are used to control the land, warships the sea, and aircraft the sky. These fields have also overlapped in the forms of marines, paratroopers, naval aircraft carriers, and surface-to-air missiles, among others. Satellites in low Earth orbit have made outer space a factor in warfare as well as it is used for detailed intelligence gathering, however no known aggressive actions have been taken from space.
Material culture and technology
Main articles: Tool and Technology
An archaic Acheulean stone tool

Stone tools were used by proto-humans at least 2.5 million years ago.[136] The controlled use of fire began around 1.5 million years ago. Since then, humans have made major advances, developing complex technology to create tools to aid their lives and allowing for other advancements in culture. Major leaps in technology include the discovery of agriculture – what is known as the Neolithic Revolution, and the invention of automated machines in the Industrial Revolution.

Archaeology attempts to tell the story of past or lost cultures in part by close examination of the artifacts they produced. Early humans left stone tools, pottery, and jewelry that are particular to various regions and times.
Clothing, adornments, hair trimming, and body modifications
Main articles: Clothing, Body modification, and Haircut

Throughout their history humans have altered their appearance by wearing clothing [137][138]and adornments, by trimming or shaving hair or by means of body modifications.

Body modification is the deliberate altering of the human body for any non-medical reason, such as aesthetics, sexual enhancement, a rite of passage, religious reasons, to display group membership or affiliation, to create body art, shock value, or self expression.[139] In its most broad definition it includes plastic surgery, socially acceptable decoration (e.g., common ear piercing in many societies), and religious rites of passage (e.g., circumcision in a number of cultures).[139]
Language
Main article: Language

The capacity humans have to transfer concepts, ideas and notions through speech (and recently, writing) is unrivaled in known species. Unlike the closed call systems of other primates in which sounds are unique and mutually exclusive, human language is open—an infinite number of meanings can be produced by combining a limited number of sounds and words. Human language has the quality of displacement, using words to represent things and happenings that are not presently or locally occurring, but elsewhere or at a different time.[72] Basic displacement may occur in other species, but is relatively elaborated in humans, allowing symbols and language to refer to abstract or even purely imaginary states, and underpinning the complex symbolic culture of the species. The faculty of speech is a defining feature of humanity, possibly predating phylogenetic separation of the modern population. Language is central to the communication between humans, and to the sense of identity that unites nations, cultures and ethnic groups. The invention of writing systems at least five thousand years ago allowed the preservation of language on material objects, and was a major step in cultural evolution. The science of linguistics describes the structure of language and the relationship between languages. There are approximately six thousand different languages currently in use, including sign languages, and many thousands more that are considered extinct.[140]
Religion and spirituality
Main articles: Religion and Spirituality
Religion and spirituality are important aspects of human cultures.
Nsibidi script from Nigeria. A means of communication among the initiates of the Ekpe secret society.[141]

Religion is generally defined as a belief system concerning the supernatural, sacred or divine, and practices, values, institutions and rituals associated with such belief. Some religions also have a moral code. The evolution and the history of the first religions have recently become areas of active scientific investigation.[142][143][144] However, in the course of its development, religion has taken on many forms that vary by culture and individual perspective. Some of the chief questions and issues religions are concerned with include life after death (commonly involving belief in an afterlife), the origin of life, the nature of the universe (religious cosmology) and its ultimate fate (eschatology), and what is moral or immoral. A common source for answers to these questions are beliefs in transcendent divine beings such as deities or a singular God, although not all religions are theistic. Spirituality, belief or involvement in matters of the soul or spirit, is one of the many different approaches humans take in trying to answer fundamental questions about humankind's place in the universe, the meaning of life, and the ideal way to live one's life. Though these topics have also been addressed by philosophy, and to some extent by science, spirituality is unique in that it focuses on mystical or supernatural concepts such as karma and God.

Although the exact level of religiosity can be hard to measure,[145] a majority of humans professes some variety of religious or spiritual belief, although some are irreligious. Other humans have no religious beliefs or are atheists, scientific skeptics, agnostics or simply non-religious. Humanism is a philosophy which seeks to include all of humanity and all issues common to humans; it is usually non-religious. Additionally, although most religions and spiritual beliefs are clearly distinct from science on both a philosophical and methodological level, the two are not generally considered mutually exclusive; a majority of humans hold a mix of both scientific and religious views. The distinction between philosophy and religion, on the other hand, is at times less clear, and the two are linked in such fields as the philosophy of religion and theology.
Philosophy and self-reflection
Main articles: Philosophy and Human self-reflection
See also: Human nature
Statue of Confucius on Chongming Island in Shanghai

Philosophy is a discipline or field of study involving the investigation, analysis, and development of ideas at a general, abstract, or fundamental level. It is the discipline searching for a general understanding of reality, reasoning and values. Major fields of philosophy include logic, metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy of mind, and axiology (which includes ethics and aesthetics). Philosophy covers a very wide range of approaches, and is used to refer to a worldview, to a perspective on an issue, or to the positions argued for by a particular philosopher or school of philosophy.
Science and mathematics
Main articles: Science and Mathematics

Scientific approach and mathematics have been unique to humans.

Mathematics is connected to language, and it is argued that this special genetic trait of humans, linked to language and abstract thought is responsible for the mathematical ability.

Closely related is humans' ability to model the world and use science. Although scientific revolution is relatively recent, humans have attempted to explain their environment since the ancient times.
Art, music, and literature
Main articles: Art, Music, and Literature
Allegory of Music (ca. 1594), a painting of a woman writing sheet music by Lorenzo Lippi

Art is one of the most unusual aspects of human behavior and a cultural universal, and humans have been producing artistic works at least since the days of Cro Magnon. As a form of cultural expression by humans, art may be defined by the pursuit of diversity and the usage of narratives of liberation and exploration (i.e. art history, art criticism, and art theory) to mediate its boundaries. This distinction may be applied to objects or performances, current or historical, and its prestige extends to those who made, found, exhibit, or own them. In the modern use of the word, art is commonly understood to be the process or result of making material works that, from concept to creation, adhere to the "creative impulse" of human beings. Art is distinguished from other works by being in large part unprompted by necessity, by biological drive, or by any undisciplined pursuit of recreation.

Music is a natural intuitive phenomenon based on the three distinct and interrelated organization structures of rhythm, harmony, and melody. Listening to music is perhaps the most common and universal form of entertainment for humans, while learning and understanding it are popular disciplines. There are a wide variety of music genres and ethnic musics. Literature, the body of written—and possibly oral—works, especially creative ones, includes prose, poetry and drama, both fiction and non-fiction. Literature includes such genres as epic, legend, myth, ballad, and folklore.
See also
Portal icon 	Mammals portal



Dog
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to: navigation, search
For other uses, see Dog (disambiguation).
Page semi-protected
Domestic dog
Temporal range: 0.015–0 Ma
Pre?
?
O
S
D
C
P
T
J
K
Pg
N
?
Pleistocene – Recent
Yellow Labrador Retriever, the most registered breed of 2009 with the AKC
More images of dogs.
Conservation status
Domesticated
Scientific classification
Kingdom: 	Animalia
Phylum: 	Chordata
Class: 	Mammalia
Order: 	Carnivora
Family: 	Canidae
Genus: 	Canis
Species: 	C. lupus
Subspecies: 	C. l. familiaris[1]
Trinomial name
Canis lupus familiaris[2]
Synonyms
Species synonymy[show]

The domestic dog (Canis lupus familiaris),[2][3] is a subspecies of the gray wolf (Canis lupus), a member of the Canidae family of the mammilian order Carnivora. The term "domestic dog" is generally used for both domesticated and feral varieties. The dog may have been the first animal to be domesticated, and has been the most widely kept working, hunting, and companion animal in human history. The word "dog" may also mean the male of a canine species,[4] as opposed to the word "bitch" for the female of the species.

The present lineage of dogs was domesticated from gray wolves about 15,000 years ago.[5] Remains of domesticated dogs have been found in Siberia and Belgium from about 33,000 years ago. None of these early domestication lineages seem to have survived the Last Glacial Maximum. Although mDNA suggest a split between dogs and wolves around 100,000 years ago no specimens predate 33,000 years ago that are clearly morphologically domesticated dog.[6][7][8]

Dogs' value to early human hunter-gatherers led to them quickly becoming ubiquitous across world cultures. Dogs perform many roles for people, such as hunting, herding, pulling loads, protection, assisting police and military, companionship, and, more recently, aiding handicapped individuals. This impact on human society has given them the nickname "Man's Best Friend" in the Western world. In some cultures, dogs are also source of meat.[9][10] In 2001, there were estimated to be 400 million dogs in the world.[11]

Most breeds of dogs are at most a few hundred years old, having been artificially selected for particular morphologies and behaviors by people for specific functional roles. Through this selective breeding, the dog has developed into hundreds of varied breeds, and shows more behavioral and morphological variation than any other land mammal.[12] For example, height measured to the withers ranges from a 2 inches (51 mm) in the Chihuahua to a 2 feet (0.61 m) in the Irish Wolfhound; color varies from white through grays (usually called "blue") to black, and browns from light (tan) to dark ("red" or "chocolate") in a wide variation of patterns; coats can be short or long, coarse-haired to wool-like, straight, curly, or smooth.[13] It is common for most breeds to shed this coat.
Contents

    1 Etymology and related terminology
    2 Taxonomy
    3 History and evolution
        3.1 DNA studies
    4 Roles with humans
        4.1 Early roles
        4.2 As pets
        4.3 Work
        4.4 Sports and shows
        4.5 As a food source
        4.6 Health risks to humans
        4.7 Health benefits for humans
        4.8 Shelters
    5 Biology
        5.1 Senses
            5.1.1 Vision
            5.1.2 Hearing
            5.1.3 Smell
        5.2 Physical characteristics
            5.2.1 Coat
            5.2.2 Tail
        5.3 Types and breeds
        5.4 Health
            5.4.1 Mortality
            5.4.2 Predation
        5.5 Diet
        5.6 Reproduction
        5.7 Neutering
    6 Intelligence and behavior
        6.1 Intelligence
        6.2 Behavior
            6.2.1 Sleep
        6.3 Dog growl
    7 Differences from wolves
        7.1 Physical characteristics
        7.2 Behavior
        7.3 Trainability
    8 Mythology
    9 Gallery of dogs in art
    10 See also
    11 References
    12 Bibliography
    13 External links

Etymology and related terminology

Dog is the common use term that refers to members of the subspecies Canis lupus familiaris (canis, "dog"; lupus, "wolf"; familiaris, "of a household" or "domestic"). The term can also be used to refer to a wider range of related species, such as the members of the genus Canis, or "true dogs", including the wolf, coyote, and jackals; or it can refer to the members of the tribe Canini, which would also include the African wild dog; or it can be used to refer to any member of the family Canidae, which would also include the foxes, bush dog, raccoon dog, and others.[14] Some members of the family have "dog" in their common names, such as the raccoon dog and the African wild dog. A few animals have "dog" in their common names but are not canids, such as the prairie dog.

The English word dog comes from Middle English dogge, from Old English docga, a "powerful dog breed".[15] The term may derive from Proto-Germanic *dukkon, represented in Old English finger-docce ("finger-muscle").[16] The word also shows the familiar petname diminutive -ga also seen in frogga "frog", picga "pig", stagga "stag", wicga "beetle, worm", among others.[17] Due to the archaic structure of the word, the term dog may ultimately derive from the earliest layer of Proto-Indo-European vocabulary, reflecting the role of the dog as the earliest domesticated animal.[18]

In 14th-century England, hound (from Old English: hund) was the general word for all domestic canines, and dog referred to a subtype of hound, a group including the mastiff. It is believed this "dog" type of "hound" was so common it eventually became the prototype of the category “hound”.[19] By the 16th century, dog had become the general word, and hound had begun to refer only to types used for hunting.[20] Hound, cognate to German Hund, Dutch hond, common Scandinavian hund, and Icelandic hundur, is ultimately derived from the Proto-Indo-European *kwon- "dog", found in Welsh ci (plural cwn), Latin canis, Greek kýon, Lithuanian šuõ.[21]

In breeding circles, a male canine is referred to as a dog, while a female is called a bitch (Middle English bicche, from Old English bicce, ultimately from Old Norse bikkja). A group of offspring is a litter. The father of a litter is called the sire, and the mother is called the dam. Offspring are, in general, called pups or puppies, from French poupée, until they are about a year old. The process of birth is whelping, from the Old English word hwelp (cf. German Welpe, Dutch welp, Swedish valpa, Icelandic hvelpur).[22]
Taxonomy

In 1753, the father of modern biological taxonomy, Carl Linnaeus, listed among the types of quadruped familiar to him, the Latin word for dog, “Canis.” Among the species within this genus, Linnaeus listed the fox, as "Canis vulpes", wolves (Canis lupus), and the domestic dog, (Canis canis; see File:Linnaeus - Regnum Animale (1735).png).

In later editions, Linnaeus dropped "Canis canis" and greatly expanded his list of the Canis genus of quadrupeds, and by 1758 included alongside the foxes, wolves, and jackels and many more terms that are now listed as synonyms for domestic dog, including ‘’aegyptius” (hairless dog), ‘’aquaticus’’, (water dog), and ‘’mustelinus’’ (literally “badger dog).” Among these were two that later experts have been widely used for domestic dogs as a species: ‘’Canis domesticus’’ and, most predominantly, ‘’Canis familiaris”, the “common” or “familiar” dog.[23]

The domestic dog was accepted as a species in its own right until overwhelming evidence from behavior, vocalizations, morphology, and molecular biology led to the contemporary scientific understanding that a single species, the gray wolf, is the common ancestor for all breeds of domestic dogs.[24][25][26] In recognition of this fact, the domestic dog was reclassified in 1993 as Canis lupus familiaris, a subspecies of the gray wolf Canis lupus, by the Smithsonian Institution and the American Society of Mammalogists. Canis lupus familiaris is listed as the name for the taxon that is broadly used in the scientific community and recommended by ITIS although Canis familiaris, however, is a recognised synonym.[27]

Since that time, domesticus and all taxa referring to domestic dogs or subspecies of dog listed by Linnaeus, Johann Friedrich Gmelin in 1792, and Christian Smith in 1839, lost their subspecies status and have been listed as taxonomic synonyms for Canis lupus familiaris [28]
History and evolution
Main articles: Origin of the domestic dog and Gray wolf
Ancient Greek rhyton in the shape of a dog's head, made by Brygos, early 5th century BC. Jérôme Carcopino Museum, Department of Archaeology, Aleria

Domestic dogs inherited complex behaviors from their wolf ancestors, which would have been pack hunters with complex body language. These sophisticated forms of social cognition and communication may account for their trainability, playfulness, and ability to fit into human households and social situations, and these attributes have given dogs a relationship with humans that has enabled them to become one of the most successful species on the planet today.[24]

Although experts largely disagree over the details of dog domestication, it is agreed that human interaction played a significant role in shaping the subspecies.[29] Domestication may have occurred initially in separate areas particularly Siberia and Europe. Currently it is thought domestication of our current lineage of dog occurred sometime as early as 15,000 years ago and arguably as late as 8500 years ago. Shortly after the latest domestication, dogs became ubiquitous in human populations, and spread throughout the world.

Emigrants from Siberia likely crossed the Bering Strait with dogs in their company, and some experts[who?] suggest the use of sled dogs may have been critical to the success of the waves that entered North America roughly 12,000 years ago,[citation needed] although the earliest archaeological evidence of dog-like canids in North America dates from about 9,000 years ago.[30] Dogs were an important part of life for the Athabascan population in North America, and were their only domesticated animal. Dogs also carried much of the load in the migration of the Apache and Navajo tribes 1,400 years ago. Use of dogs as pack animals in these cultures often persisted after the introduction of the horse to North America.[31][page needed]

The current consensus among biologists and archaeologists is that the dating of first domestication is indeterminate,[29][31] although more recent evidence shows isolated domestication events as early as 33,000 years ago.[32][33] There is conclusive evidence the present lineage of dogs genetically diverged from their wolf ancestors at least 15,000 years ago,[5][34][35] but some believe domestication to have occurred earlier.[29] Evidence is accruing that there were previous domestication events, but that those lineages died out.[7]

It is not known whether humans domesticated the wolf as such to initiate dog's divergence from its ancestors, or whether dog's evolutionary path had already taken a different course prior to domestication. For example, it is hypothesized that some wolves gathered around the campsites of paleolithic camps to scavenge refuse, and associated evolutionary pressure developed that favored those who were less frightened by, and keener in approaching, humans.
Tesem, an old Egyptian sighthound-like dog.

The bulk of the scientific evidence for the evolution of the domestic dog stems from morphological studies of archaeological findings and mitochondrial DNA studies. The divergence date of roughly 15,000 years ago is based in part on archaeological evidence that demonstrates the domestication of dogs occurred more than 15,000 years ago,[24][31] and some genetic evidence indicates the domestication of dogs from their wolf ancestors began in the late Upper Paleolithic close to the Pleistocene/Holocene boundary, between 17,000 and 14,000 years ago.[36] But there is a wide range of other, contradictory findings that make this issue controversial.[citation needed] There are findings beginning currently at 33,000 years ago distinctly placing them as domesticated dogs evidenced not only by shortening of the muzzle but widening as well as crowding of teeth.

Archaeological evidence suggests the latest dogs could have diverged from wolves was roughly 15,000 years ago, although it is possible they diverged much earlier.[24] In 2008, a team of international scientists released findings from an excavation at Goyet Cave in Belgium declaring a large, toothy canine existed 31,700 years ago and ate a diet of horse, musk ox and reindeer.[37]

Prior to this Belgian discovery, the earliest dog fossils were two large skulls from Russia and a mandible from Germany dated from roughly 14,000 years ago.[5][24] Remains of smaller dogs from Natufian cave deposits in the Middle East, including the earliest burial of a human being with a domestic dog, have been dated to around 10,000 to 12,000 years ago.[5][38] There is a great deal of archaeological evidence for dogs throughout Europe and Asia around this period and through the next two thousand years (roughly 8,000 to 10,000 years ago), with fossils uncovered in Germany, the French Alps, and Iraq, and cave paintings in Turkey.[24] The oldest remains of a domesticated dog in the Americas were found in Texas and have been dated to about 9,400 years ago.[39]
DNA studies

DNA studies have provided a wide range of possible divergence dates, from 15,000 to 40,000 years ago,[5] to as much as 100,000 to 140,000 years ago.[40] These results depend on a number of assumptions.[24] Genetic studies are based on comparisons of genetic diversity between species, and depend on a calibration date. Some estimates of divergence dates from DNA evidence use an estimated wolf-coyote divergence date of roughly 700,000 years ago as a calibration.[41] If this estimate is incorrect, and the actual wolf-coyote divergence is closer to one or two million years ago, or more,[42] then the DNA evidence that supports specific dog-wolf divergence dates would be interpreted very differently.

Furthermore, it is believed the genetic diversity of wolves has been in decline for the last 200 years, and that the genetic diversity of dogs has been reduced by selective breeding. This could significantly bias DNA analyses to support an earlier divergence date. The genetic evidence for the domestication event occurring in East Asia is also subject to violations of assumptions. These conclusions are based on the location of maximal genetic divergence, and assume hybridization does not occur, and that breeds remain geographically localized. Although these assumptions hold for many species, there is good reason to believe that they do not hold for canines.[24]

Genetic analyses indicate all dogs are likely descended from a handful of domestication events with a small number of founding females,[24][36] although there is evidence domesticated dogs interbred with local populations of wild wolves on several occasions.[5] Data suggest dogs first diverged from wolves in East Asia, and these domesticated dogs then quickly migrated throughout the world, reaching the North American continent around 8000 BC.[5] The oldest groups of dogs, which show the greatest genetic variability and are the most similar to their wolf ancestors, are primarily Asian and African breeds, including the Basenji, Lhasa Apso, and Siberian Husky.[43] Some breeds thought to be very old, such as the Pharaoh Hound, Ibizan Hound, and Norwegian Elkhound, are now known to have been created more recently.[43]

There is a great deal of controversy surrounding the evolutionary framework for the domestication of dogs.[24] Although it is widely claimed that "man domesticated the wolf,"[44] man may not have taken such a proactive role in the process.[24] The nature of the interaction between man and wolf that led to domestication is unknown and controversial. At least three early species of the Homo genus began spreading out of Africa roughly 400,000 years ago, and thus lived for a considerable time in contact with canine species.[24]

Despite this, there is no evidence of any adaptation of canine species to the presence of the close relatives of modern man. If dogs were domesticated, as believed, roughly 15,000 years ago, the event (or events) would have coincided with a large expansion in human territory and the development of agriculture. This has led some biologists to suggest one of the forces that led to the domestication of dogs was a shift in human lifestyle in the form of established human settlements. Permanent settlements would have coincided with a greater amount of disposable food and would have created a barrier between wild and anthropogenic canine populations.[24]
Roles with humans
A Siberian Husky used as a pack animal
Early roles

Wolves, and their dog descendants, would have derived significant benefits from living in human camps—more safety, more reliable food, lesser caloric needs, and more chance to breed.[45] They would have benefited from humans’ upright gait that gives them larger range over which to see potential predators and prey, as well as color vision that, at least by day, gives humans better visual discrimination.[45] Camp dogs would also have benefitted from human tool use, as in bringing down larger prey and controlling fire for a range of purposes.[45]

Humans would also have derived enormous benefit from the dogs associated with their camps.[46] For instance, dogs would have improved sanitation by cleaning up food scraps.[46] Dogs may have provided warmth, as referred to in the Australian Aboriginal expression “three dog night” (an exceptionally cold night), and they would have alerted the camp to the presence of predators or strangers, using their acute hearing to provide an early warning.[46]

Anthropologists believe the most significant benefit would have been the use of dogs' sensitive sense of smell to assist with the hunt.[46] The relationship between the presence of a dog and success in the hunt is often mentioned as a primary reason for the domestication of the wolf, and a 2004 study of hunter groups with and without a dog gives quantitative support to the hypothesis that the benefits of cooperative hunting was an important factor in wolf domestication.[47]

The cohabitation of dogs and humans would have greatly improved the chances of survival for early human groups, and the domestication of dogs may have been one of the key forces that led to human success.[48]
Couple sitting on the lawn with a pet British Bulldog
A British Bulldog shares a day at the park.
As pets

"The most widespread form of interspecies bonding occurs between humans and dogs"[46] and the keeping of dogs as companions, particularly by elites, has a long history.[49] However, pet dog populations grew significantly after World War II as suburbanization increased.[49] In the 1950s and 1960s, dogs were kept outside more often than they tend to be today [50] (using the expression “in the doghouse” to describe exclusion from the group signifies the distance between the doghouse and the home) and were still primarily functional, acting as a guard, children’s playmate, or walking companion. From the 1980s, there have been changes in the role of the pet dog, such as the increased role of dogs in the emotional support of their owners.[51] People and dogs have become increasingly integrated and implicated in each other’s lives,[52] to the point where pet dogs actively shape the way a family and home are experienced.[53]

There have been two major trends in the changing status of pet dogs. The first has been the ‘commodification’ of the dog, shaping it to conform to human expectations of personality and behaviour.[53] The second has been the broadening of the concept of the family and the home to include dogs-as-dogs within everyday routines and practices.[53]

There are a vast range of commodity forms available to transform a pet dog into an ideal companion.[54] The list of goods, services and places available is enormous: from dog perfumes, couture, furniture and housing, to dog groomers, therapists, trainers and care-takers, dog cafes, spas, parks and beaches, and dog hotels, airlines and cemeteries.[54] While dog training as an organized activity can be traced back to the 18th century, in the last decades of the 20th century it became a high profile issue as many normal dog behaviors such as barking, jumping up, digging, rolling in dung, fighting, and urine marking became increasingly incompatible with the new role of a pet dog.[55] Dog training books, classes and television programs proliferated as the process of commodifying the pet dog continued.[56]
An Australian Cattle Dog in reindeer antlers sits on Santa's lap
A pet dog taking part in Christmas traditions

The majority of contemporary dog owners describe their dog as part of the family,[53] although some ambivalence about the relationship is evident in the popular reconceptualisation of the dog-human family as a pack.[53] A dominance model of dog-human relationships has been promoted by some dog trainers, such as on the television program Dog Whisperer. However it has been disputed that "trying to achieve status" is characteristic of dog–human interactions.[57] Pet dogs play an active role in family life; for example, a study of conversations in dog-human families showed how family members use the dog as a resource, talking to the dog, or talking through the dog, to mediate their interactions with each other.[58]

Another study of dogs’ roles in families showed many dogs have set tasks or routines undertaken as family members, the most common of which was helping with the washing-up by licking the plates in the dishwasher, and bringing in the newspaper from the lawn.[53] Increasingly, human family members are engaging in activities centred on the perceived needs and interests of the dog, or in which the dog is an integral partner, such as Dog Dancing and Doga.[54]

According to the statistics published by the American Pet Products Manufacturers Association in the National Pet Owner Survey in 2009–2010, it is estimated there are 77.5 million dog owners in the United States.[59] The same survey shows nearly 40% of American households own at least one dog, of which 67% own just one dog, 25% two dogs and nearly 9% more than two dogs. There does not seem to be any gender preference among dogs as pets, as the statistical data reveal an equal number of female and male dog pets. Yet, although several programs are undergoing to promote pet adoption, less than a fifth of the owned dogs come from a shelter.
Work

Dogs have lived and worked with humans in so many roles that they have earned the unique nickname, "man's best friend",[60] a phrase used in other languages as well. They have been bred for herding livestock,[61] hunting (e.g. pointers and hounds),[62] rodent control,[3] guarding, helping fishermen with nets, detection dogs, and pulling loads, in addition to their roles as companions.[3]
Book of the Hunt, Gaston III, Count of Foix, 1387–88.

Service dogs such as guide dogs, utility dogs, assistance dogs, hearing dogs, and psychological therapy dogs provide assistance to individuals with physical or mental disabilities.[63][64] Some dogs owned by epileptics have been shown to alert their handler when the handler shows signs of an impending seizure, sometimes well in advance of onset, allowing the owner to seek safety, medication, or medical care.[65]

Dogs included in human activities in terms of helping out humans are usually called working dogs. Dogs of several breeds are considered working dogs. Some working dog breeds include Akita, Alaskan Malamute, Anatolian Shepherd Dog, Bernese Mountain Dog, Black Russian Terrier, Boxer, Bullmastiff, Doberman Pinscher, Dogue de Bordeaux, German Pinscher, German Shepherd,[66] Giant Schnauzer, Great Dane, Great Pyrenees, Great Swiss Mountain Dog, Komondor, Kuvasz, Mastiff, Neapolitan Mastiff, Newfoundland, Portuguese Water Dog, Rottweiler, Saint Bernard, Samoyed, Siberian Husky, Standard Schnauzer, and Tibetan Mastiff.
Sports and shows
See also: Conformation show

Owners of dogs often enter them in competitions[67] such as breed conformation shows or sports, including racing and sledding.

In conformation shows, also referred to as breed shows, a judge familiar with the specific dog breed evaluates individual purebred dogs for conformity with their established breed type as described in the breed standard. As the breed standard only deals with the externally observable qualities of the dog (such as appearance, movement, and temperament), separately tested qualities (such as ability or health) are not part of the judging in conformation shows.
As a food source
See also: Dog meat
Fried dog meat offered as speciality, among lamb and fish. Shaoyang, Hunan Province, China

Dog meat is consumed in some East Asian countries, including Korea, China, and Vietnam, a practice that dates back to antiquity.[68] It is estimated that 13–16 million dogs are killed and consumed in Asia every year.[69] The BBC claims that, in 1999, more than 6,000 restaurants served soups made from dog meat in South Korea.[70] In Korea, the primary dog breed raised for meat, the nureongi (???), differs from those breeds raised for pets that Koreans may keep in their homes.[71]

The most popular Korean dog dish is gaejang-guk (also called bosintang), a spicy stew meant to balance the body's heat during the summer months; followers of the custom claim this is done to ensure good health by balancing one's gi, or vital energy of the body. A 19th century version of gaejang-guk explains that the dish is prepared by boiling dog meat with scallions and chili powder. Variations of the dish contain chicken and bamboo shoots. While the dishes are still popular in Korea with a segment of the population, dog is not as widely consumed as beef, chicken, and pork.[72]

Other cultures, such as Polynesia and pre-Columbian Mexico, also consumed dog meat in their history. However, Western, South Asian, African, and Middle Eastern cultures, in general, regard consumption of dog meat as taboo. In some places, however, such as in rural areas of Poland, dog fat is believed to have medicinal properties—being good for the lungs for instance.[73]

A CNN report in China dated March 2010 interviews a dog meat vendor who states that most of the dogs that are available for selling to restaurant are raised in special farms but that there is always a chance that a sold dog is someone's lost pet, although dog pet breeds are not considered edible.[74]
Health risks to humans

In the United States, cats and dogs are a factor in more than 86,000 falls each year.[75] It has been estimated around 2% of dog-related injuries treated in UK hospitals are domestic accidents. The same study found that while dog involvement in road traffic accidents was difficult to quantify, dog-associated road accidents involving injury more commonly involved two-wheeled vehicles.[76]

Toxocara canis (dog roundworm) eggs in dog feces can cause toxocariasis. In the United States, about 10,000 cases of Toxocara infection are reported in humans each year, and almost 14% of the U.S. population is infected.[77] In Great Britain, 24% of soil samples taken from public parks contained T. canis eggs.[78] Untreated toxocariasis can cause retinal damage and decreased vision.[78] Dog feces can also contain hookworms that cause cutaneous larva migrans in humans.[79][80][81][82]

The incidence of dog bites, and especially fatal dog bites, is extremely rare in America considering the number of pet dogs in the country.[83] Fatalities from dog bites occur in America at the rate of one per four million dogs.[83] A Colorado study found bites in children were less severe than bites in adults.[84] The incidence of dog bites in the U.S. is 12.9 per 10,000 inhabitants, but for boys aged 5 to 9, the incidence rate is 60.7 per 10,000. Moreover, children have a much higher chance to be bitten in the face or neck.[85] Sharp claws with powerful muscles behind them can lacerate flesh in a scratch that can lead to serious infections.[86]

In the UK between 2003 and 2004, there were 5,868 dog attacks on humans, resulting in 5,770 working days lost in sick leave.[87]
Health benefits for humans
Small dog laying between the hands
A human cuddles a Doberman puppy.

A growing body of research indicates the companionship of a dog can enhance human physical health and psychological wellbeing.[88] Dog and cat owners have been shown to have better mental and physical health than nonowners, making fewer visits to the doctor and being less likely to be on medication than nonowners.[89] In one study, new pet owners reported a highly significant reduction in minor health problems during the first month following pet acquisition, and this effect was sustained in dog owners through to the end of the study.[90]

In addition, dog owners took considerably more physical exercise than cat owners and people without pets. The group without pets exhibited no statistically significant changes in health or behaviour. The results provide evidence that pet acquisition may have positive effects on human health and behaviour, and that for dog owners these effects are relatively long term.[90] Pet ownership has also been associated with increased coronary artery disease survival, with dog owners being significantly less likely to die within one year of an acute myocardial infarction than those who did not own dogs.[91]
Gunnar Kaasen and Balto, the lead dog on the last relay team of the 1925 serum run to Nome.

The health benefits of dogs can result from contact with dogs, not just from dog ownership. For example, when in the presence of a pet dog, people show reductions in cardiovascular, behavioral, and psychological indicators of anxiety.[92] The benefits of contact with a dog also include social support, as dogs are able to not only provide companionship and social support themselves, but also to act as facilitators of social interactions between humans.[93] One study indicated that wheelchair users experience more positive social interactions with strangers when they are accompanied by a dog than when they are not.[94]

The practice of using dogs and other animals as a part of therapy dates back to the late 18th century, when animals were introduced into mental institutions to help socialize patients with mental disorders.[95] Animal-assisted intervention research has shown that animal-assisted therapy with a dog can increase a person with Alzheimer’s disease’s social behaviours, such as smiling and laughing.[96] One study demonstrated that children with ADHD and conduct disorders who participated in an education program with dogs and other animals showed increased attendance, increased knowledge and skill objectives, and decreased antisocial and violent behavior compared to those who were not in an animal-assisted program.[97]
Shelters
Main article: Animal shelter

Every year, between 6 and 8 million dogs and cats enter US animal shelters.[98] The Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) estimates that approximately 3 to 4 million dogs and cats are euthanized yearly in shelters across the United States.[99] However, the percentage of dogs in US animal shelters that are eventually adopted and removed from the shelters by their new owners has increased since the mid 1990s from around 25% up to around 60–75% in the mid first decade of the 21st century.[100]

Pets entering the shelters are euthanized in countries all over the world because of the lack of financial provisions to take care of these animals. Most shelters complain of not having enough resources to feed the pets and by being constrained to kill them, as the likelihood for all of them to find an owner is very small. In poor countries, euthanasia is usually violent.
Biology
Main article: Dog anatomy

Domestic dogs have been selectively bred for millennia for various behaviors, sensory capabilities, and physical attributes.[3] Modern dog breeds show more variation in size, appearance, and behavior than any other domestic animal. Nevertheless, their morphology is based on that of their wild ancestors, gray wolves.[3] Dogs are predators and scavengers, and like many other predatory mammals, the dog has powerful muscles, fused wrist bones, a cardiovascular system that supports both sprinting and endurance, and teeth for catching and tearing.

Dogs are highly variable in height and weight. The smallest known adult dog was a Yorkshire Terrier, that stood only 6.3 centimetres (2.5 in) at the shoulder, 9.5 cm (3.7 in) in length along the head-and-body, and weighed only 113 grams (4.0 oz). The largest known dog was an English Mastiff which weighed 155.6 kilograms (343 lb) and was 250 cm (98 in) from the snout to the tail.[101] The tallest dog is a Great Dane that stands 106.7 cm (42.0 in) at the shoulder.[102]
Senses
Vision
Pekingese's large eyes

Like most mammals, dogs are dichromats and have color vision equivalent to red-green color blindness in humans (deuteranopia).[103][104][105][106] Dogs are less sensitive to differences in grey shades than humans and also can detect brightness at about half the accuracy of humans.[107]

The dog's visual system has evolved to aid proficient hunting.[103] While a dog's visual acuity is poor (that of a poodle's has been estimated to translate to a Snellen rating of 20/75[103]), their visual discrimination for moving objects is very high; dogs have been shown to be able to discriminate between humans (e.g., identifying their owner) at a range of between 800 and 900 m, however this range decreases to 500–600 m if the object is stationary.[103]

Dogs have a temporal resolution of between 60 and 70 Hz, which explains why many dogs struggle to watch television, as most such modern screens are optimized for humans at 50–60 Hz.[107] Dogs can detect a change in movement that exists in a single diopter of space within their eye. Humans, by comparison, require a change of between 10 and 20 diopters to detect movement.[108][109]

As crepuscular hunters, dogs often rely on their vision in low light situations: They have very large pupils, a high density of rods in the fovea, an increased flicker rate, and a tapetum lucidum.[103] The tapetum is a reflective surface behind the retina that reflects light to give the photoreceptors a second chance to catch the photons. There is also a relationship between body size and overall diameter of the eye. A range of 9.5 and 11.6 mm can be found between various breeds of dogs. This 20% variance can be substantial and is associated as an adaptation toward superior night vision.[110]

The eyes of different breeds of dogs have different shapes, dimensions, and retina configurations.[111] Many long-nosed breeds have a "visual streak" – a wide foveal region that runs across the width of the retina and gives them a very wide field of excellent vision. Some long-muzzled breeds, in particular, the sighthounds, have a field of vision up to 270° (compared to 180° for humans). Short-nosed breeds, on the other hand, have an "area centralis": a central patch with up to three times the density of nerve endings as the visual streak, giving them detailed sight much more like a human's. Some broad-headed breeds with short noses have a field of vision similar to that of humans.[104][105]

Most breeds have good vision, but some show a genetic predisposition for myopia – such as Rottweilers, with which one out of every two has been found to be myopic.[103] Dogs also have a greater divergence of the eye axis than humans, enabling them to rotate their pupils farther in any direction. The divergence of the eye axis of dogs ranges from 12–25° depending on the breed.[108]

Experimentation has proven that dogs can distinguish between complex visual images such as that of a cube or a prism. Dogs also show attraction to static visual images such as the silhouette of a dog on a screen, their own reflections, or videos of dogs; however, their interest declines sharply once they are unable to make social contact with the image.[112]
Hearing

The frequency range of dog hearing is approximately 40 Hz to 60,000 Hz,[113] which means that dogs can detect sounds far beyond the upper limit of the human auditory spectrum.[105][113][114] In addition, dogs have ear mobility, which allows them to rapidly pinpoint the exact location of a sound.[115] Eighteen or more muscles can tilt, rotate, raise, or lower a dog's ear. A dog can identify a sound's location much faster than a human can, as well as hear sounds at four times the distance.[115]
Smell
The wet, textured nose of a dog

While the human brain is dominated by a large visual cortex, the dog brain is dominated by an olfactory cortex.[103] The olfactory bulb in dogs is roughly forty times bigger than the olfactory bulb in humans, relative to total brain size, with 125 to 220 million smell-sensitive receptors.[103] The bloodhound exceeds this standard with nearly 300 million receptors.[103]

Consequently, it has been estimated that dogs, in general, have an olfactory sense ranging from one hundred thousand to one million times more sensitive than a human's. In some dog breeds, such as bloodhounds, the olfactory sense may be up to 100 million times greater than a human's.[116] The wet nose is essential for determining the direction of the air current containing the smell. Cold receptors in the skin are sensitive to the cooling of the skin by evaporation of the moisture by air currents.[117]
Physical characteristics
Coat
Main article: Coat (dog)
A heavy winter coat with countershading in a mixed-breed dog

The coats of domestic dogs are of two varieties: "double" being common with dogs (as well as wolves) originating from colder climates, made up of a coarse guard hair and a soft down hair, or "single", with the topcoat only.

Domestic dogs often display the remnants of countershading, a common natural camouflage pattern. A countershaded animal will have dark coloring on its upper surfaces and light coloring below,[118] which reduces its general visibility. Thus, many breeds will have an occasional "blaze", stripe, or "star" of white fur on their chest or underside.[119]
Tail
See also: Docking

There are many different shapes for dog tails: straight, straight up, sickle, curled, or cork-screw. As with many canids, one of the primary functions of a dog's tail is to communicate their emotional state, which can be important in getting along with others. In some hunting dogs, however, the tail is traditionally docked to avoid injuries.[120] In some breeds, puppies can be born with a short tail or no tail at all.[121]
Types and breeds
Main article: Dog breed
Further information: Dog type
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels demonstrate with-breed variation.

While all dogs are genetically very similar,[5] natural selection and selective breeding have reinforced certain characteristics in certain populations of dogs, giving rise to dog types and dog breeds. Dog types are broad categories based on function, genetics, or characteristics.[122] Dog breeds are groups of animals that possess a set of inherited characteristics that distinguishes them from other animals within the same species. Modern dog breeds are non-scientific classifications of dogs kept by modern kennel clubs.

Purebred dogs of one breed are genetically distinguishable from purebred dogs of other breeds,[43] but the means by which kennel clubs classify dogs is unsystematic. Systematic analyses of the dog genome has revealed only four major types of dogs that can be said to be statistically distinct.[43] These include the "old world dogs" (e.g., Malamute and Shar Pei), "Mastiff"-type (e.g., English Mastiff), "herding"-type (e.g., Border Collie), and "all others" (also called "modern"- or "hunting"-type).[43][123]
Health
Main article: Dog health
Further information: Category:Dog health
See also: CVBD

Dogs are susceptible to various diseases, ailments, and poisons, some of which can affect humans. To defend against many common diseases, dogs are often vaccinated.
A mixed-breed dog

Some breeds of dogs are prone to certain genetic ailments such as elbow or hip dysplasia, blindness, deafness, pulmonic stenosis, cleft palate, and trick knees. Two serious medical conditions particularly affecting dogs are pyometra, affecting unspayed females of all types and ages, and bloat, which affects the larger breeds or deep-chested dogs. Both of these are acute conditions, and can kill rapidly. Dogs are also susceptible to parasites such as fleas, ticks, and mites, as well as hookworm, tapeworm, roundworm, and heartworm.

Dogs are highly susceptible to theobromine poisoning, typically from ingestion of chocolate. Theobromine is toxic to dogs because, although the dog's metabolism is capable of breaking down the chemical, the process is so slow that even small amounts of chocolate can be fatal, especially dark chocolate.

Dogs are also vulnerable to some of the same health conditions as humans, including diabetes, dental and heart disease, epilepsy, cancer, hypothyroidism, and arthritis.[124]
Mortality
Main article: Aging in dogs

The typical lifespan of dogs varies widely among breeds, but for most the median longevity, the age at which half the dogs in a population have died and half are still alive, ranges from 10 to 13 years.[125][126][127][128] Individual dogs may live well beyond the median of their breed.

The breed with the shortest lifespan (among breeds for which there is a questionnaire survey with a reasonable sample size) is the Dogue de Bordeaux, with a median longevity of about 5.2 years, but several breeds, including Miniature Bull Terriers, Bloodhounds, and Irish Wolfhounds are nearly as short-lived, with median longevities of 6 to 7 years.[128]

The longest-lived breeds, including Toy Poodles, Japanese Spitz, Border Terriers, and Tibetan Spaniels, have median longevities of 14 to 15 years.[128] The median longevity of mixed-breed dogs, taken as an average of all sizes, is one or more years longer than that of purebred dogs when all breeds are averaged.[126][127][128][129] The dog widely reported to be the longest-lived is "Bluey," who died in 1939 and was claimed to be 29.5 years old at the time of his death; however, the Bluey record is anecdotal and unverified.[130] On December 5, 2011, Pusuke, the world's oldest living dog recognized by Guinness Book of World Records, died aged 26 years and 9 months.[131]
Predation

Although wild dogs, like wolves, are apex predators, they can be killed in territory disputes with wild animals.[132] Furthermore, in areas where both dogs and other large predators live, dogs can be a major food source for big cats or canines. Reports from Croatia indicate wolves kill dogs more frequently than they kill sheep. Wolves in Russia apparently limit feral dog populations. In Wisconsin, more compensation has been paid for dog losses than livestock.[132] Some wolf pairs have been reported to prey on dogs by having one wolf lure the dog out into heavy brush where the second animal waits in ambush.[133] In some instances, wolves have displayed an uncharacteristic fearlessness of humans and buildings when attacking dogs, to the extent that they[which?] have to be beaten off or killed.[134]

Coyotes and big cats have also been known to attack dogs. Leopards in particular are known to have a predilection for dogs, and have been recorded to kill and consume them regardless of the dog's size or ferocity.[135] Tigers in Manchuria, Indochina, Indonesia, and Malaysia are reputed to kill dogs with the same vigor as leopards.[136] Striped Hyenas are major predators of village dogs in Turkmenistan, India, and the Caucasus.[137] Reptiles such as alligators and pythons have been known to kill and eat dogs.
Diet
See also: Dog food
Golden Retriever gnawing a pig's foot

Despite their descent from wolves and classification as Carnivora, dogs are variously described in scholarly and other writings as carnivores[138][139] or omnivores.[3][140][141][142] Unlike obligate carnivores, such as the cat family with its shorter small intestine, dogs can adapt to a wide-ranging diet, and are not dependent on meat-specific protein nor a very high level of protein in order to fulfill their basic dietary requirements. Dogs will healthily digest a variety of foods, including vegetables and grains, and can consume a large proportion of these in their diet.[3]

A number of common human foods and household ingestibles are toxic to dogs, including chocolate solids (theobromine poisoning), onion and garlic (thiosulphate, sulfoxide or disulfide poisoning),[143] grapes and raisins, macadamia nuts, as well as various plants and other potentially ingested materials.[144][145]
Reproduction
Two dogs copulating on a beach
Main article: Canine reproduction

In domestic dogs, sexual maturity begins to happen around age six to twelve months for both males and females,[3][146] although this can be delayed until up to two years old for some large breeds. This is the time at which female dogs will have their first estrous cycle. They will experience subsequent estrous cycles biannually, during which the body prepares for pregnancy. At the peak of the cycle, females will come into estrus, being mentally and physically receptive to copulation.[3] Because the ova survive and are capable of being fertilized for a week after ovulation, it is possible for a female to mate with more than one male.[3]

Dogs bear their litters roughly 56 to 72 days after fertilization,[3][147] with an average of 63 days, although the length of gestation can vary. An average litter consists of about six puppies,[148] though this number may vary widely based on the breed of dog. In general, toy dogs produce from one to four puppies in each litter, while much larger breeds may average as many as twelve.

Some dog breeds have acquired traits through selective breeding that interfere with reproduction. Male French Bulldogs, for instance, are incapable of mounting the female. For many dogs of this breed, the female must be artificially inseminated in order to reproduce.[149]
Neutering
Globe icon.
	The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. Please improve this article and discuss the issue on the talk page. (March 2012)
A feral dog from Sri Lanka nursing her four puppies

Neutering refers to the sterilization of animals, usually by removal of the male's testicles or the female's ovaries and uterus, in order to eliminate the ability to procreate and reduce sex drive. Because of the overpopulation of dogs in some countries, many animal control agencies, such as the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA), advise that dogs not intended for further breeding should be neutered, so that they do not have undesired puppies that may have to later be euthanized.[150]

According to the Humane Society of the United States, 3–4 million dogs and cats are put down each year in the United States and many more are confined to cages in shelters because there are many more animals than there are homes. Spaying or castrating dogs helps keep overpopulation down.[151] Local humane societies, SPCAs, and other animal protection organizations urge people to neuter their pets and to adopt animals from shelters instead of purchasing them.

Neutering reduces problems caused by hypersexuality, especially in male dogs.[152] Spayed female dogs are less likely to develop some forms of cancer, affecting mammary glands, ovaries, and other reproductive organs.[153] However, neutering increases the risk of urinary incontinence in female dogs,[154] and prostate cancer in males,[155] as well as osteosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, cruciate ligament rupture, obesity, and diabetes mellitus in either gender.[156]
Intelligence and behavior
Intelligence
Main article: Dog intelligence
The Border Collie is considered to be one of the most intelligent breeds.

The domestic dog has a predisposition to exhibit a social intelligence that is uncommon in the animal world.[103] Dogs are capable of learning in a number of ways, such as through simple reinforcement (e.g., classical or operant conditioning) and by observation.[103]

Dogs go through a series of stages of cognitive development. As with humans, the understanding that objects not being actively perceived still remain in existence (called object permanence) is not present at birth. It develops as the young dog learns to interact intentionally with objects around it, at roughly 8 weeks of age.[103]

Puppies learn behaviors quickly by following examples set by experienced dogs.[103] This form of intelligence is not peculiar to those tasks dogs have been bred to perform, but can be generalized to myriad abstract problems. For example, Dachshund puppies that watched an experienced dog pull a cart by tugging on an attached piece of ribbon in order to get a reward from inside the cart learned the task fifteen times faster than those left to solve the problem on their own.[103][157]

Dogs can also learn by mimicking human behaviors. In one study, puppies were presented with a box, and shown that, when a handler pressed a lever, a ball would roll out of the box. The handler then allowed the puppy to play with the ball, making it an intrinsic reward. The pups were then allowed to interact with the box. Roughly three-quarters of the puppies subsequently touched the lever, and over half successfully released the ball, compared to only 6% in a control group that did not watch the human manipulate the lever.[158] Another study found that handing an object between experimenters who then used the object's name in a sentence successfully taught an observing dog each object's name, allowing the dog to subsequently retrieve the item.[159]
Sergeant Stubby wearing his uniform and medals. Stubby participated in four offensives and 17 battles.

Dogs also demonstrate sophisticated social cognition by associating behavioral cues with abstract meanings.[103] One such class of social cognition involves the understanding that others are conscious agents. Research has shown that dogs are capable of interpreting subtle social cues, and appear to recognize when a human or dog's attention is focused on them. To test this, researchers devised a task in which a reward was hidden underneath one of two buckets. The experimenter then attempted to communicate with the dog to indicate the location of the reward by using a wide range of signals: tapping the bucket, pointing to the bucket, nodding to the bucket, or simply looking at the bucket.[160] The results showed that domestic dogs were better than chimpanzees, wolves, and human infants at this task, and even young puppies with limited exposure to humans performed well.[103]

Psychology research has shown that humans´ gaze instinctively moves to the left in order to watch the right side of a person's face, which is related to use of right hemisphere brain for facial recognition, including human facial emotions. Research at the University of Lincoln (2008) shows that dogs share this instinct when meeting a human being, and only when meeting a human being (i.e., not other animals or other dogs). As such they are the only non-primate species known to do so.[161][162]

Stanley Coren, an expert on dog psychology, states that these results demonstrated the social cognition of dogs can exceed that of even our closest genetic relatives, and that this capacity is a recent genetic acquisition that distinguishes the dog from its ancestor, the wolf.[103] Studies have also investigated whether dogs engaged in partnered play change their behavior depending on the attention-state of their partner.[163] Those studies showed that play signals were only sent when the dog was holding the attention of its partner. If the partner was distracted, the dog instead engaged in attention-getting behavior before sending a play signal.[163]

Coren has also argued that dogs demonstrate a sophisticated theory of mind by engaging in deception, which he supports with a number of anecdotes, including one example wherein a dog hid a stolen treat by sitting on it until the rightful owner of the treat left the room.[103] Although this could have been accidental, Coren suggests that the thief understood that the treat's owner would be unable to find the treat if it were out of view. Together, the empirical data and anecdotal evidence points to dogs possessing at least a limited form of theory of mind.[103][163]

A study found a third of dogs suffered from anxiety when separated from others.[164]

A Border Collie named Chaser has learned the names for 1,022 toys after three years of training, so many that her trainers have had to mark the names of the objects lest they forget themselves. This is higher than Rico, another border collie who could remember at least 200 objects.[165]
Behavior
Main article: Dog behavior
Further information: Category:Dog training and behavior

Although dogs have been the subject of a great deal of behaviorist psychology (e.g. Pavlov's dog), they do not enter the world with a psychological "blank slate".[103] Rather, dog behavior is affected by genetic factors as well as environmental factors.[103] Domestic dogs exhibit a number of behaviors and predispositions that were inherited from wolves.[103]

The Gray Wolf is a social animal that has evolved a sophisticated means of communication and social structure. The domestic dog has inherited some of these predispositions, but many of the salient characteristics in dog behavior have been largely shaped by selective breeding by humans. Thus some of these characteristics, such as the dog's highly developed social cognition, are found only in primitive forms in grey wolves.[160]

The existence and nature of personality traits in dogs have been studied (15329 dogs of 164 different breeds) and five consistent and stable "narrow traits" identified, described as playfulness, curiosity/fearlessness, chase-proneness, sociability and aggressiveness. A further higher order axis for shyness–boldness was also identified.[166][167]
Sleep
Further information: Sleep (non-human)

The average sleep time of a dog is said to be 10.1 hours per day.[168] Like humans, dogs have two main types of sleep: Slow-wave sleep, then Rapid eye movement sleep sleep, the state in which dreams occur.[169]
Dog growl

A new study in Budapest, Hungary has found that dogs are able to tell how big another dog is just by listening to its growl. A specific growl is used by dogs to protect their food. The research also shows that dogs do not lie about their size, and this is the first time research has shown animals can determine another’s size by the sound it makes. The test, using images of many kinds of dogs, showed a small and big dog and played a growl. The result, showed that 20 of the 24 test dogs looked at the image of the appropriate-sized dog first and looked at it longest.[170]
Differences from wolves
Some dogs, like this Tamaskan, look very much like wolves.
Physical characteristics
Further information: Wolf

Compared to equally sized wolves, dogs tend to have 20% smaller skulls, 30% smaller brains,[171] as well as proportionately smaller teeth than other canid species.[172] Dogs require fewer calories to function than wolves. It is thought by certain experts that the dog's limp ears are a result of atrophy of the jaw muscles.[172] The skin of domestic dogs tends to be thicker than that of wolves, with some Inuit tribes favoring the former for use as clothing due to its greater resistance to wear and tear in harsh weather.[172]
Behavior

Dogs tend to be poorer than wolves at observational learning, being more responsive to instrumental conditioning.[172] Feral dogs show little of the complex social structure or dominance hierarchy present in wolf packs. For example, unlike wolves, the dominant alpha pairs of a feral dog pack do not force the other members to wait for their turn on a meal when scavenging off a dead ungulate as the whole family is free to join in. For dogs, other members of their kind are of no help in locating food items, and are more like competitors.[172]

Feral dogs are primarily scavengers, with studies showing that unlike their wild cousins, they are poor ungulate hunters, having little impact on wildlife populations where they are sympatric. However, feral dogs have been reported to be effective hunters of reptiles in the Galápagos Islands,[173] and free ranging pet dogs are more prone to predatory behavior toward wild animals.

Domestic dogs can be monogamous.[174] Breeding in feral packs can be, but does not have to be restricted to a dominant alpha pair (such things also occur in wolf packs).[175] Male dogs are unusual among canids by the fact that they mostly seem to play no role in raising their puppies, and do not kill the young of other females to increase their own reproductive success.[173] Some sources say that dogs differ from wolves and most other large canid species by the fact that they do not regurgitate food for their young, nor the young of other dogs in the same territory.[172]
A dog displaying mastery of the command "sit"
An Australian Shepherd-Beagle mix displaying mastery of the "sit" command

However, this difference was not observed in all domestic dogs. Regurgitating of food by the females for the young as well as care for the young by the males has been observed in domestic dogs, dingos as well as in other feral or semi-feral dogs. Regurgitating of food by the females and direct choosing of only one mate has been observed even in those semi-feral dogs of direct domestic dog ancestry. Also regurgitating of food by males has been observed in free-ranging domestic dogs.[174][176]
Trainability

Dogs display much greater tractability than tame wolves, and are, in general, much more responsive to coercive techniques involving fear, aversive stimuli, and force than wolves, which are most responsive toward positive conditioning and rewards.[177] Unlike tame wolves, dogs tend to respond more to voice than hand signals.[178]
Mythology

In mythology, dogs often serve as pets or as watchdogs.[179]

In Greek mythology, Cerberus is a three-headed watchdog who guards the gates of Hades.[179] In Norse mythology, a bloody, four-eyed dog called Garmr guards Helheim.[179] In Persian mythology, two four-eyed dogs guard the Chinvat Bridge.[179] In Philippine mythology, Kimat who is the pet of Tadaklan, god of thunder, is responsible for lightning. In Welsh mythology, Annwn is guarded by Cwn Annwn[179]

In Judaism and Islam, dogs are viewed as unclean scavengers.[179] In Christianity, dogs represent faithfulness.[179] In Asian countries such as China, Korea, and Japan, dogs are viewed as kind protectors.[179]
Gallery of dogs in art
Ancient Greek black-figure pottery depicting the return of a hunter and his dog. Made in Athens between 550–530 BC, found in Rhodes.  
Riders and dogs. Ancient Greek Attic black-figure hydria, ca. 510–500 BC, from Vulci. Louvre Museum, Paris.  
William McElcheran's Cross Section-dogs Dundas (TTC) Toronto  
Detail of The Imperial Prince and his dog Nero by Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux 1865 Marble. Photographed at the Musée d'Orsay.  
A woodcut illustration from The history of four-footed beasts and serpents by Edward Topsell, 1658  
See also
Portal icon 	Dogs portal
Book icon 	Book: Dog
Wikipedia books are collections of articles that can be downloaded or ordered in print.

    Argos (dog)
    Dog odor
    Dognapping
    Ethnocynology
    Hachiko Dog loyalty
    Lost pet services
    Subspecies of Canis lupus
    Wolfdog

Lists:

    List of dog breeds
    List of dogs
    List of fictional dogs
    List of most popular dog breeds

References

    ^ "Mammal Species of the World – Browse: Canis lupus familiaris". Bucknell.edu. 2005. Retrieved 2012-03-12.
    ^ a b "Mammal Species of the World – Browse: lupus". Bucknell.edu. Retrieved 2010-08-10.
    ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Dewey, T. and S. Bhagat. 2002. "Canis lupus familiaris", Animal Diversity Web. Retrieved 6 January 2009.
    ^ "Dog". Dictionary.com.
    ^ a b c d e f g h Savolainen P, Zhang YP, Luo J, Lundeberg J, Leitner T (November 2002). "Genetic evidence for an East Asian origin of domestic dogs". Science 298 (5598): 1610–3. Bibcode 2002Sci...298.1610S. doi:10.1126/science.1073906. PMID 12446907.
    ^ Germonpré, Mietje; Sablin, Mikhail V.; Stevens, Rhiannon E.; Hedges, Robert E.M.; Hofreiter, Michael; Stiller, Mathias; Després, Viviane R. (2009). "Fossil dogs and wolves from Palaeolithic sites in Belgium, the Ukraine and Russia: osteometry, ancient DNA and stable isotopes". Journal of Archaeological Science 36 (2): 473. doi:10.1016/j.jas.2008.09.033.
    ^ a b Ovodov, Nikolai D.; Crockford, Susan J.; Kuzmin, Yaroslav V.; Higham, Thomas F. G.; Hodgins, Gregory W. L.; van der Plicht, Johannes (2012). "A 33,000-year-old incipient dog from the Altai Mountains of Siberia: Evidence of the earliest domestication disrupted by the Last Glacial Maximum". PLoS ONE 6 (7): e22821. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0022821. PMC 3145761. PMID 21829526.
    ^ Pionnier-Capitan M, Bemilli C, Bodu P, Célérier G, Ferrié J-G, Fosse P, Garcià M, and Vigne J-D (2011). "New evidence for Upper Palaeolithic small domestic dogs in South-Western Europe". Journal of Archaeological Science 38 (9): 2123. doi:10.1016/j.jas.2011.02.028.
    ^ Wingfield-Hayes, Rupert (2002-06-29). "China's taste for the exotic". BBC News.
    ^ "Vietnam's dog meat tradition". BBC News. 31 December 2001.
    ^ Coppinger, Ray (2001). Dogs: a Startling New Understanding of Canine Origin, Behavior and Evolution. New York: Scribner. p. 352. ISBN 0-684-85530-5.
    ^ Spady TC, Ostrander EA (January 2008). "Canine Behavioral Genetics: Pointing Out the Phenotypes and Herding up the Genes". American Journal of Human Genetics 82 (1): 10–8. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.12.001. PMC 2253978. PMID 18179880.
    ^ The Complete dog book: the photograph, history, and official standard of every breed admitted to AKC registration, and the selection, training, breeding, care, and feeding of pure-bred dogs. New York, N.Y: Howell Book House. 1992. ISBN 0-87605-464-5.[page needed]
    ^ Rasmussen, G. S. A. (April 1999). "Livestock predation by the painted hunting dog Lycaon pictus in a cattle ranching region of Zimbabwe: a case study". Biological Conservation 88 (1): 133–139. doi:10.1016/S0006-3207(98)00006-8.
    ^ "Domestic PetDog Classified By Linnaeus In 1758 As Canis Familiaris And Canis Familiarus Domesticus". www.encyclocentral.com. Retrieved 18 June 2008.
    ^ Seebold, Elmar (2002). Kluge. Etymologisches Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache. Berlin/New York: Walter de Gruyter. p. 207. ISBN 3-11-017473-1.
    ^ "Dictionary of Etymology", Dictionary.com, s.v. "dog", encyclopedia.com retrieved on 27 May 2009.
    ^ Mallory, J. R. (1991). In search of the Indo-Europeans: language, archaeology and myth. London: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-27616-1.[page needed]
    ^ Broz, Vlatko (2008). "Diachronic Investigations of False Friends". Contemporary Linguistics (Suvremena lingvistika) 66 (2): 199–222.
    ^ René Dirven; Marjolyn Verspoor (2004). Cognitive exploration of language and linguistics. John Benjamins Publishing Company. pp. 215–216. ISBN 978-90-272-1906-0.
    ^ "The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language: Fourth Edition". www.bartleby.com. Archived from the original on 18 October 2006. Retrieved 30 November 2006.
    ^ Gould, Jean (1978). All about dog breeding for quality and soundness. London, Eng: Pelham. ISBN 0-7207-1064-2.[page needed]
    ^ Linnaeus, Carolus (1758). Systema naturae per regna tria naturae:secundum classes, ordines, genera, species, cum characteribus, differentiis, synonymis, locis.. 1 (10th ed.). Holmiae (Laurentii Salvii). p. 38. Retrieved 8 September 2008..
    ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Miklósi
    ^ Serpell, James (1995). The domestic dog: its evolution, behaviour, and interactions with people. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-42537-9.
    ^ "ITIS Standard Report Page: Canis familiarus domesticus". Itis.gov. Retrieved 2010-12-21.
    ^ "ITIS Report: Canis lupus familiaris". ITIS Data. Integrated Taxonomic Information System. Retrieved 16 April 2010.
    ^ "Mammal Species of the World – Browse: familiaris". Bucknell.edu. Retrieved 2012-04-02.
    ^ a b c Miklósi, pp. 95–136.
    ^ Miklósi, p. 104.
    ^ a b c Derr, Mark (2004). A dogs history of America. North Point Press.
    ^ Dog: man's best friend for over 33,000 years. FoxNews (2012-01-24)
    ^ Hirst, K. K. Dog History – How were Dogs Domesticated? archaeology.about.com
    ^ Lindblad-Toh K; Wade CM; Mikkelsen TS; Karlsson, Elinor K.; Jaffe, David B.; Kamal, Michael; Clamp, Michele; Chang, Jean L. et al (2005). "Genome sequence, comparative analysis and haplotype structure of the domestic dog". Nature 438 (7069): 803–19. Bibcode 2005Natur.438..803L. doi:10.1038/nature04338. PMID 16341006.
    ^ Fiennes, Alice; T-W-Fiennes, Richard N. (1968). The natural history of the dog. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 0-297-76455-1.[page needed]
    ^ a b McGourty, Christine (22 November 2002). "Origin of dogs traced". BBC News. Retrieved 29 November 2006.
    ^ "World's first dog lived 31,700 years ago, ate big" msnbc 17 October 2008.
    ^ Davis, Simon J. M.; Valla, François R. (1978). "Evidence for domestication of the dog 12,000 years ago in the Natufian of Israel". Nature 276 (5688): 608–10. Bibcode 1978Natur.276..608D. doi:10.1038/276608a0.
    ^ Clarke Canfield, Old dog, new tricks: Study IDs 9,400-year-old mutt. Associated Press (via The Seattle Times) (2010-01-19).
    ^ Vilà C; Savolainen P; Maldonado JE; Amorim, IR; Rice, JE; Honeycutt, RL; Crandall, KA; Lundeberg, J et al (1997). "Multiple and ancient origins of the domestic dog". Science 276 (5319): 1687–9. doi:10.1126/science.276.5319.1687. PMID 9180076.
    ^ Miklósi, p. 110
    ^ "Paleodb.org". Paleodb.org. 2009-01-04. Retrieved 2010-12-21.
    ^ a b c d e Parker HG; Kim LV; Sutter NB; Carlson, S; Lorentzen, TD; Malek, TB; Johnson, GS; Defrance, HB et al (2004). "Genetic structure of the purebred domestic dog". Science 304 (5674): 1160–4. Bibcode 2004Sci...304.1160P. doi:10.1126/science.1097406. PMID 15155949.
    ^ Koler-Matznick, Janice (2002). "The Origin of the Dog Revisited". Anthrozoos.
    ^ a b c Groves, Colin (1999). "The Advantages and Disadvantages of Being Domesticated". Perspectives in Human Biology 4: 1–12. ISSN 1038-5762.
    ^ a b c d e Tacon, Paul; Pardoe, Colin (2002). "Dogs make us human". Nature Australia 27 (4): 52–61.
    ^ Ruusila, Vesa; Pesonen, Mauri (2004). "Interspecific cooperation in human (Homo sapiens) hunting: the benefits of a barking dog (Canis familiaris)". Annales Zoologici Fennici 41 (4): 545–9.
    ^ Newby, Jonica (1997). The Pact for Survival. Sydney: ABC Books. ISBN 0-7333-0581-4.[page needed]
    ^ a b Derr, Mark (1997). Dog’s Best Friend. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-14280-9.
    ^ Franklin, A (2006). "Be[a]ware of the Dog: a post-humanist approach to housing". Housing Theory and Society 23 (3): 137–156. doi:10.1080/14036090600813760. ISSN 1403-6096.
    ^ Katz, Jon (2003). The New Work of Dogs. New York: Villard Books. ISBN 0-375-76055-5.
    ^ Haraway, Donna (2003). The Companion Species manifesto : Dogs, People and Significant Otherness. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press. ISBN 0-9717575-8-5.
    ^ a b c d e f Power, Emma (2008). "Furry Families: Making a Human-Dog Family through Home". Social and Cultural Geography 9 (5): 535–555. doi:10.1080/14649360802217790.
    ^ a b c Nast, Heidi J. (2006). "Loving ... Whatever: Alienation, Neoliberalism and Pet-Love in the Twenty-First Century". ACME: an International E-Journal for Critical Geographies 5 (2): 300–327. ISSN 1492-9732.
    ^ "A Brief History of Dog Training". Dog Zone. 3 June 2007. Retrieved 19 February 2010.
    ^ Jackson Schebetta, Lisa (2009). "Mythologies and Commodifications of Dominion in The Dog Whisperer with Cesar Millan". Journal for Critical Animal Studies (Institute for Critical Animal Studies) 7 (1): 107–131. ISSN 1948-352X.
    ^ Bradshaw, John; Blackwell, Emily J.; Casey, Rachel A. (2009). "Dominance in domestic dogs: useful construct or bad habit?". Journal of Veterinary Behavior (Elsevier) 4 (3): 135–144. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2008.08.004. Archived from the original on 2010-08-27.
    ^ Tannen, Deborah (2004). "Talking the Dog: Framing Pets as Interactional Resources in Family Discourse". Research on Language and Social Interaction 37 (4): 399–420. doi:10.1207/s15327973rlsi3704_1. ISSN 1532-7973.
    ^ "U.S. Pet Ownership Statistics". Retrieved 24 June 2010.
    ^ "The Story of Old Drum". Cedarcroft Farm Bed & Breakfast — Warrensburg, MO. Retrieved 29 November 2006.
    ^ Williams, Tully (2007). Working Sheep Dogs. Collingwood, Vic.: CSIRO Publishing. ISBN 0-643-09343-5.
    ^ Serpell, James (1995). "Origins of the dog: domestication and early history". The Domestic Dog. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. ISBN 0-521-41529-2.
    ^ "Psychiatric Service Dog Society". Psychdog.org. 2005-10-01. Retrieved 2010-12-21.
    ^ "About Guide Dogs – Assistance Dogs International". Assistancedogsinternational.org. Retrieved 2010-12-21.
    ^ Dalziel DJ, Uthman BM, Mcgorray SP, Reep RL (2003). "Seizure-alert dogs: a review and preliminary study". Seizure 12 (2): 115–20. doi:10.1016/S105913110200225X. PMID 12566236.
    ^ "German Shepherd Dog | American Kennel Club". American Kennel Club. Retrieved 2010-12-28.
    ^ "A Beginner's Guide to Dog Shows". American Kennel Club. Retrieved 30 October 2008.
    ^ Simoons, Frederick J. (1994). Eat not this flesh: food avoidances from prehistory to the present (second ed.). University of Wisconsin Press. pp. 208–212. ISBN 978-0-299-14254-4.
    ^ How many dogs and cats are eaten in Asia?. Animalpeoplenews.org. September 2003.
    ^ South Korea's dog day, BBC News, 17 August 1999.
    ^ Pettid, Michael J., Korean Cuisine: An Illustrated History, London: Reaktion Books Ltd., 2008, 25 ISBN 1-86189-348-5
    ^ Pettid, Michael J., Korean Cuisine: An Illustrated History, London: Reaktion Books Ltd., 2008, 84–85 ISBN 1-86189-348-5
    ^ Day, Matthew (2009-08-07). "Polish couple accused of making dog meat delicacy". London: Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 2010-12-21.
    ^ "Inside the cat and dog meat market in China". CNN. 9 March 2010. Retrieved 24 June 2010.
    ^ "Injury Prevention Bulletin". Northwest Terratories Health and Social Services. 25 March 2009. Retrieved 7 January 2010.
    ^ Bewley BR (1985). "Medical hazards from dogs". British Medical Journal 291 (6498): 760–1. doi:10.1136/bmj.291.6498.760. PMC 1417177. PMID 3929930.
    ^ Sun Huh, Sooung Lee. Toxocariasis (2008-08-20). medscape.com.
    ^ a b "Toxocariasis". Kids Health. The Nemours Foundation. 2010. Retrieved 12 February 2010.
    ^ Johnson, Kate (May 2002). "Parasites in pet feces cause puzzling infections". Pediatric News. Retrieved 11 May 2009.
    ^ Chiodo, Paula; Basualdo, Juan; Ciarmela, Laura; Pezzani, Betina; Apezteguía, María; Minvielle, Marta (2006). "Related factors to human toxocariasis in a rural community of Argentina". Memórias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz 101 (4): 397–400. doi:10.1590/S0074-02762006000400009.
    ^ A.H. Talaizadeh et.al. Human toxocariasis: A report of 3 cases. Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences Quarterly, Volume 23 October – December 2007 (Part-I) Number 5.
    ^ "Dog fouling – Woking Borough Council". Woking.gov.uk. Retrieved 2010-12-21.
    ^ a b Grandin, Temple; Johnson, Catherine (2005). Animals in Translation. New York, New York: Scribner. pp. 131–132. ISBN 0-7432-4769-8.
    ^ DVM360.com (2009-07-01). DVM Magazine.
    ^ Weiss HB, Friedman DI, Coben JH (1998). "Incidence of dog bite injuries treated in emergency departments". JAMA 279 (1): 51–3. doi:10.1001/jama.279.1.51. PMID 9424044.
    ^ Tierney DM, Strauss LP, Sanchez JL (2006). "Capnocytophaga canimorsus Mycotic Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm: Why the Mailman Is Afraid of Dogs". Journal of Clinical Microbiology 44 (2): 649–51. doi:10.1128/JCM.44.2.649-651.2006. PMC 1392675. PMID 16455937.
    ^ Mail campaign over dog attacks (11 August 2005). BBC News.
    ^ Podberscek, A.L. (2006). "Positive and Negative Aspects of Our Relationship with Companion Animals". Veterinary Research Communications 30 (1): 21–27. doi:10.1007/s11259-006-0005-0.
    ^ Headey B. (1999). "Health benefits and health cost savings due to pets: preliminary estimates from an Australian national survey". Social Indicators Research 47 (2): 233–243. doi:10.1023/A:1006892908532.
    ^ a b Serpell J (1991). "Beneficial effects of pet ownership on some aspects of human health and behaviour". Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 84 (12): 717–20. PMC 1295517. PMID 1774745.
    ^ Friedmann E, Thomas SA (1995). "Pet ownership, social support, and one-year survival after acute myocardial infarction in the Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression Trial (CAST)". The American Journal of Cardiology 76 (17): 1213–7. doi:10.1016/S0002-9149(99)80343-9. PMID 7502998.
    ^ Wilson CC (1991). "The pet as an anxiolytic intervention". The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 179 (8): 482–9. doi:10.1097/00005053-199108000-00006. PMID 1856711.
    ^ McNicholas, J.; Collis, G. M. (2006). "Animals as social supports: Insights for understanding animal assisted therapy". In Fine, Aubrey H.. Handbook on animal-assisted therapy: theoretical foundations and guidelines for practice. Amsterdam: Elsevier/Academic Press. pp. 49–71. ISBN 0-12-369484-1.
    ^ Eddy J, Hart LA, Boltz RP (1988). "The effects of service dogs on social acknowledgments of people in wheelchairs". The Journal of Psychology 122 (1): 39–45. PMID 2967371.
    ^ Kruger, K.A. & Serpell, J.A. (2006). Animal-assisted interventions in mental health: Definitions and theoretical foundations, In Fine, A.H. (Ed.), Handbook on animal-assisted therapy: Theoretical foundations and guidelines for practice. San Diego, CA, Academic Press: 21–38. ISBN 0-12-369484-1
    ^ Batson, K.; McCabe, B.; Baun, M.M.; Wilson, C. (1998). "The effect of a therapy dog on socialization and psychological indicators of stress in persons diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease". In Turner, Dennis C.; Wilson, Cindy C.. Companion animals in human health. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. pp. 203–15. ISBN 978-0-7619-1061-9.
    ^ Katcher, A.H.; Wilkins, G.G. (2006). "The Centaur's Lessons: Therapeutic education through care of animals and nature study". In Fine, Aubrey H.. Handbook on animal-assisted therapy: theoretical foundations and guidelines for practice. Amsterdam: Elsevier/Academic Press. pp. 153–77. ISBN 0-12-369484-1.
    ^ Animals abandoned as recession hits home. TheStar.com. 22 December 2008.
    ^ HSUS Pet Overpopulation Estimates The Humane Society of the United States
    ^ Palika, Liz (4 February 2004). Purebred Rescue Dog Adoption: Rewards and Realities. Howell Book House. ISBN 978-0-7645-4971-7. Retrieved 24 February 2010.
    ^ "World's Largest Dog". Retrieved 7 January 2008.
    ^ "Guinness World Records – Tallest Dog Living". Guinness World Records. 31 August 2004. Retrieved 7 January 2009.
    ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v Coren, Stanley (2004). How Dogs Think. First Free Press, Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-7432-2232-6.[page needed]
    ^ a b A&E Television Networks (1998). Big Dogs, Little Dogs: The companion volume to the A&E special presentation. A Lookout Book. GT Publishing. ISBN 1-57719-353-9.[page needed]
    ^ a b c Alderton, David (1984). The Dog. Chartwell Books. ISBN 0-89009-786-0.[page needed]
    ^ "Dr. P's Dog Training: Vision in Dogs & People". 1998. Retrieved 6 June 2008.
    ^ a b Miklósi, p. 140.
    ^ a b Mech, David. Wolves, Behavior, Ecology, and Conservation. The University of Chicago Press, 2006, p. 98.
    ^ Barking Orders. "A realistic look into the eyesight of a dog ", Barking Orders, The Canine School for Humans, March 10, 2010.
    ^ Miklósi, p. 139.
    ^ "Catalyst: Dogs' Eyes". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 25 September 2003. Retrieved 26 November 2006.
    ^ Miklósi, p. 142.
    ^ a b Elert, Glenn; Timothy Condon (2003). "Frequency Range of Dog Hearing". The Physics Factbook. Retrieved 22 October 2008.
    ^ "How well do dogs and other animals hear". Retrieved 7 January 2008.
    ^ a b "Dog Sense of Hearing". seefido.com. Retrieved 22 October 2008.
    ^ "Smell". nhm.org. 6 May 2004. Archived from the original on 1 August 2008. Retrieved 22 October 2008.
    ^ Dijkgraaf S.;Vergelijkende dierfysiologie;Bohn, Scheltema en Holkema, 1978, ISBN 90-313-0322-4
    ^ Klappenbach, Laura (2008). "What is Counter Shading?". About.com. Retrieved 22 October 2008.
    ^ Cunliffe, Juliette (2004). "Coat Types, Colours and Markings". The Encyclopedia of Dog Breeds. Paragon Publishing. pp. 20–23. ISBN 0-7525-8276-3.
    ^ "The Case for Tail Docking". Council of Docked Breeds. Retrieved 22 October 2008.
    ^ "Bourbonnais pointer or ‘short tail pointer’".
    ^ The Merriam-Webster Editorial Staff, ed. (1967). Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged. Springfield, MA U.S.A.: G&C Merriam Company. p. 2476. "type (4a) the combination of character that fits an individual to a particular use or function (a strong horse of the draft type)"
    ^ Ostrander, Elaine A. (September–October 2007). "Genetics and the Shape of Dogs; Studying the new sequence of the canine genome shows how tiny genetic changes can create enormous variation within a single species". American Scientist (online). www.americanscientist.org. pp. also see chart page 4. Retrieved 09/22 2008.
    ^ Ward, Dr. Ernie. "Diseases shared by humans and pets". Dogtime.com. Retrieved 2 October 2010.
    ^ "Kennel Club/British Small Animal Veterinary Association Scientific Committee". 2004. Retrieved 5 July 2007.
    ^ a b Proschowsky, H. F., H. Rugbjerg, and A. K. Ersbell (2003). "Mortality of purebred and mixed-breed dogs in Denmark". Preventive Veterinary Medicine 58: 63. doi:10.1016/S0167-5877(03)00010-2.
    ^ a b Michell AR (1999). "Longevity of British breeds of dog and its relationships with sex, size, cardiovascular variables and disease". The Veterinary Record 145 (22): 625–9. doi:10.1136/vr.145.22.625. PMID 10619607.
    ^ a b c d Compiled by Cassidy, K. M.. "Dog Longevity Web Site, Breed Data page". Retrieved 8 July 2007.
    ^ Patronek GJ, Waters DJ, Glickman LT (1997). "Comparative longevity of pet dogs and humans: implications for gerontology research". The Journals of Gerontology. Series a, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 52 (3): B171–8. PMID 9158552.
    ^ AnAge entry for Canis familiaris AnAge Database. Human Aging Genomic Resources. Retrieved 17 July 2007.
    ^ "Pusuke, world's oldest living dog, dies in Japan". December 7, 2011.
    ^ a b Boitani, Luigi; Mech, L. David (2003). Wolves: behavior, ecology, and conservation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 448. ISBN 0-226-51696-2.
    ^ Graves, Will (2007). Wolves in Russia: Anxiety throughout the ages. Calgary: Detselig Enterprises. p. 222. ISBN 1-55059-332-3.
    ^ Kojola, I., Ronkainen, S., Hakala, A., Heikkinen, S., Kokko, S.. Interactions between wolves Canis lupus and dogs C. familiaris in Finland. Nordic Council for Wildlife Research.
    ^ Scott, Jonathan & Scott, Angela (2006). Big Cat Diary: Leopard. London: Collins. p. 108. ISBN 0-00-721181-3.
    ^ Perry, Richard (1965). The World of the Tiger. p. 260. ASIN: B0007DU2IU.
    ^ "Striped Hyaena Hyaena (Hyaena) hyaena (Linnaeus, 1758)". IUCN Species Survival Commission Hyaenidae Specialist Group. May. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 21 May 2008.
    ^ Marc Bekoff; Dale Jamieson (2006). "Ethics and the Study of Carnivores". Animal passions and beastly virtues. Temple University Press. ISBN 978-1-59213-348-2.
    ^ Hazard, Evan B. (1982). "Order Carnivora". The mammals of Minnesota. U of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-0952-9.
    ^ S. G. Pierzynowski; R. Zabielski (1999). Biology of the pancreas in growing animals. Volume 28 of Developments in animal and veterinary sciences. Elsevier Health Sciences. p. 417. ISBN 978-0-444-50217-9.
    ^ National Research Council (U.S.). Ad Hoc Committee on Dog and Cat Nutrition (2006). Nutrient requirements of dogs and cats. National Academies Press. p. 137. ISBN 978-0-309-08628-8.
    ^ Smith, Cheryl S. (2008). "Chapter 6, Omnivores Together". Grab Life by the Leash: A Guide to Bringing Up and Bonding with Your Four-Legged Friend. John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-17882-9.
    ^ Sources vary on which of these are considered the most significant toxic item.
    ^ "Toxic Foods and Plants for Dogs". entirelypets.com. Retrieved 24 June 2010.
    ^ Drs. Foster & Smith. "Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Dog". peteducation.com. Retrieved 24 June 2010.
    ^ "Sexual Maturity — Spay and Neuter". Buffalo.com. Retrieved 22 October 2008.
    ^ "Normal gestation in dogs". Retrieved 22 October 2008.
    ^ "HSUS Pet Overpopulation Estimates". The Humane Society of the United States. Retrieved 22 October 2008.
    ^ "French Bulldog Pet Care Guide". Retrieved 7 January 2008.
    ^ "Top 10 reasons to spay/neuter your pet". American Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. Retrieved 16 May 2007.
    ^ Mahlow, Jane C. (1999). "Estimation of the proportions of dogs and cats that are surgically sterilized". Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 215 (5): 640–643. PMID 10476708. "Although the cause of pet overpopulation is multifaceted, failure of owners to spay and castrate their animals is a major contributing factor."
    ^ Heidenberger E, Unshelm J, E (Feb 1990). "Changes in the behavior of dogs after castration" (in German). Tierärztliche Praxis 18 (1): 69–75. ISSN 0303-6286. PMID 2326799.
    ^ Morrison, Wallace B. (1998). Cancer in Dogs and Cats (1st ed.). Williams and Wilkins. ISBN 0-683-06105-4.
    ^ Arnold S (1997). "[Urinary incontinence in castrated bitches. Part 1: Significance, clinical aspects and etiopathogenesis]" (in German). Schweizer Archiv Für Tierheilkunde 139 (6): 271–6. PMID 9411733.
    ^ Johnston SD, Kamolpatana K, Root-Kustritz MV, Johnston GR, SD (Jul 2000). "Prostatic disorders in the dog". Anim. Reprod. Sci. 60–61: 405–15. doi:10.1016/S0378-4320(00)00101-9. ISSN 0378-4320. PMID 10844211.
    ^ Kustritz, MV (Dec 2007). "Determining the optimal age for gonadectomy of dogs and cats". JAVMA 231 (11): 1665–1675. doi:10.2460/javma.231.11.1665. ISSN 0003-1488. PMID 18052800.
    ^ Adler, Leonore Loeb and Adler, Helmut E. (2004). "Ontogeny of observational learning in the dog (Canis familiaris)". Developmental Psychobiology 10 (3): 267–271. doi:10.1002/dev.420100310. PMID 863122.
    ^ Kubinyi, E., Topal, J., & Miklosi, A. (2003). "Dogs (canis familiaris) learn their owners via observation in a manipulation task". Journal of Comparative Psychology 117 (2): 156. doi:10.1037/0735-7036.117.2.156.
    ^ McKinley, Sue; Young, Robert J (2003). "The efficacy of the model-rival method when compared to operant conditioning for training domestic dogs to perform a retrieval-selection task". AABS 81 (4): 357. doi:10.1016/S0168-1591(02)00277-0.
    ^ a b Hare, B., Brown, M., Williamson, C., & Tomasello, M., B (Nov 2002). "The domestication of social cognition in dogs". Science 298 (5598): 1634–6. Bibcode 2002Sci...298.1634H. doi:10.1126/science.1072702. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 12446914.
    ^ K Guo, C Hall, S Hall, K Meints, D Mills (2007). "Left gaze bias in human infants, rhesus monkeys, and domestic dogs". Perception 36 ECVP. Retrieved 24 June 2010.
    ^ Alleyne, Richard (29 October 2008). "Dogs can read emotion in human faces". Daily Telegraph (London). Retrieved 24 June 2010.
    ^ a b c Horowitz, Alexandra (2009). "Attention to attention in domestic dog (Canis familiaris) dyadic play". Journal Animal Cognition (Springer Berlin / Heidelberg) 12: 107. doi:10.1007/s10071-008-0175-y.
    ^ "Behaviour problems linked to pessimistic dogs". Sydney Morning Herald. 12 October 2010. Retrieved 21 October 2010.
    ^ Sheridan, Kerry Smart US dog learns more than 1,000 words. The Age (2011-01-08)
    ^ Kenth Svartberga, Björn Forkman, K; Forkman, Björn (14 June 2002). "Personality traits in the domestic dog (Canis familiaris)". Applied animal behavior science 79 (2): 133–155. doi:10.1016/S0168-1591(02)00121-1.
    ^ Svartberg, K; Tapper, I; Temrin, H; Radesater, T; Thorman, S (26 April 2004 2005). "Consistency of personality traits in dogs". Animal Behaviour 69 (2): 283–291. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2004.04.011.
    ^ "40 Winks?" Jennifer S. Holland, National Geographic Vol. 220, No. 1. July 2011.
    ^ Do Dogs Dream? by Dr. Nicholas Dodman
    ^ Faragó, T; Pongrácz P; Miklósi Á; Huber L; Virányi Z; Range, F (2010). "Dogs' Expectation about Signalers' Body Size by Virtue of Their Growls". PLoS ONE 5 (12): e15175. Bibcode 2010PLoSO...515175F. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0015175. PMC 3002277. PMID 21179521.
    ^ Serpell, James (1995). The Domestic Dog; its evolution, behaviour and interactions with people. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. p. 35. ISBN 0-521-42537-9.
    ^ a b c d e f Coppinger, Ray (2001). Dogs: a Startling New Understanding of Canine Origin, Behavior and Evolution. New York: Scribner. ISBN 0-684-85530-5.
    ^ a b Serpell, James (1995). The Domestic Dog; its evolution, behaviour and interactions with people. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. p. 267. ISBN 0-521-42537-9.
    ^ a b Pal SK (January 2005). "Parental care in free-ranging dogs, Canis familiaris". Applied Animal Behaviour Science 90 (1): 31–47. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2004.08.002.
    ^ Günther Bloch: Die Pizza-Hunde. ISBN 978-3-440-10986-1
    ^ Eberhard Trumler, Mit dem Hund auf du; Zum Verständnis seines Wesens und Verhaltens; 4. Auflage Januar 1996; R. Piper GmbH & Co. KG, München
    ^ "Are wolves and wolfdog hybrids trainable?". Wolf Park. Archived from the original on 15 June 2008. Retrieved 30 October 2008.
    ^ "Wolf Training and Socialisation: Example #1". Wolf Park. Archived from the original on 10 February 2008. Retrieved 30 October 2008.
    ^ a b c d e f g h Sherman, Josepha (August 2008). Storytelling: An Encyclopedia of Mythology and Folklore. Sharpe Reference. pp. 118–121. ISBN 978-0-7656-8047-1.

Bibliography

    Miklósi, Adám (2007). Dog Behaviour, Evolution, and Cognition. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199295852.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-929585-2.

External links
Find more about Dog on Wikipedia's sister projects:
	Definitions and translations from Wiktionary
	Images and media from Commons
	Learning resources from Wikiversity
	News stories from Wikinews
	Quotations from Wikiquote
	Source texts from Wikisource
	Textbooks from Wikibooks

Data related to Dog at Wikispecies

    American Kennel Club
    Biodiversity Heritage Library bibliography for Canis lupus familiaris
    CompareCanines.com – Compare 150+ dog breeds in over 50 different categories
    Canadian Kennel Club
    Fédération Cynologique Internationale (FCI) – World Canine Organisation
    New Zealand Kennel Club
    The Kennel Club (UK)
    Dogs in the Anci

Dogs
Behavior 	

    Barking
    Communication
    Intelligence
    Human-canine bond

Health 	

    Aging
    Anatomy
    Coat
    Diseases
    Odor
    Reproduction
    Skin disorders
    Vaccination
    Rabies

Training 	

    Clicker
    Obedience
    Rescue
    Socialization
    Puppy

Types 	

    List of types
    Bandogs
    Eskimo dogs
    Companion dog
    Cur
    Fighting dogs
    Guard dogs
    Herding dogs
    Hounds
    Hunting dogs
    Bird dogs
    Gun dogs
    Lap dogs
    Livestock guardian dogs
    Mountain dog
    Pointers
    Retrievers
    Setters
    Primitive dogs
    Scenthounds
    Sighthounds
    Sled dogs
    Terriers
    Turnspit dogs
    Water dogs

Breeds 	

    List of breeds
    List of dog hybrids (crossbreeds)
    Breed Groups
    Ancient breeds
    Conformation
    Breeding
    Crossbred (hybrid)
    Mixed-breed (Mutt)
    Origin
    Purebred
    Rare breeds

Work 	

    Assistance dog
    Attack dog
    Detection dog
    Guard dog
    Guide dog
    Hearing dog
    Herding dog
    Hunting dog
    Livestock guardian dog
    Pet dog
    Police dog
    Search and rescue dog
    Service dog
    Sled dog
    Therapy dog
    War dog
    Working Group (dogs)

Human–dog
interaction 	

    Animal testing
    Baiting
    Breed-specific legislation
    Communication
    Dog attack
    Dog park
    Dog sports
    Dog walking
    Dog daycare
    Dog grooming
    Intelligence
    Therapy
    Training
    Fear of dogs
    Dog license
    Dog food
    Dogs in religion

    Wikipedia book Book
    Category Category
    Portal Portal
Algorithm
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to: navigation 
Flow chart of an algorithm (Euclid's algorithm) for calculating the greatest common divisor (g.c.d.) of two numbers a and b in locations named A and B. The algorithm proceeds by successive subtractions in two loops: IF the test B = A yields "yes" (or true) (more accurately the number b in location B is less than or equal to the number a in location A) THEN the algorithm specifies B ? B - A (meaning the number b - a replaces the old b). Similarly IF A > B THEN A ? A - B. The process terminates when (the contents of) B is 0, yielding the g.c.d. in A. (Algorithm derived from Scott 2009:13; symbols and drawing style from Tausworthe 1977).

In mathematics and computer science, an algorithm Listeni/'ælg?r?ð?m/ (originating from al-Khwarizmi, the famous mathematician Mu?ammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi) is a step-by-step procedure for calculations. Algorithms are used for calculation, data processing, and automated reasoning.

More precisely, an algorithm is an effective method expressed as a finite list[1] of well-defined instructions[2] for calculating a function.[3] Starting from an initial state and initial input (perhaps empty),[4] the instructions describe a computation that, when executed, will proceed through a finite [5] number of well-defined successive states, eventually producing "output"[6] and terminating at a final ending state. The transition from one state to the next is not necessarily deterministic; some algorithms, known as randomized algorithms, incorporate random input.[7]

A partial formalization of the concept began with attempts to solve the Entscheidungsproblem (the "decision problem") posed by David Hilbert in 1928. Subsequent formalizations were framed as attempts to define "effective calculability"[8] or "effective method";[9] those formalizations included the Gödel–Herbrand–Kleene recursive functions of 1930, 1934 and 1935, Alonzo Church's lambda calculus of 1936, Emil Post's "Formulation 1" of 1936, and Alan Turing's Turing machines of 1936–7 and 1939. Giving a formal definition of algorithms, corresponding to the intuitive notion, remains a challenging problem.[10]
Contents

    1 Informal definition
    2 Formalization
        2.1 Expressing algorithms
    3 Implementation
    4 Computer algorithms
    5 Examples
        5.1 Sorting example
        5.2 Euclid’s algorithm
            5.2.1 Example
            5.2.2 Computer language for Euclid's algorithm
            5.2.3 An inelegant program for Euclid's algorithm
            5.2.4 An elegant program for Euclid's algorithm
        5.3 Testing the Euclid algorithms
        5.4 Measuring and improving the Euclid algorithms
    6 Algorithmic analysis
        6.1 Formal versus empirical
            6.1.1 FFT speedup
    7 Classification
        7.1 By implementation
        7.2 By design paradigm
        7.3 By field of study
        7.4 By complexity
    8 Continuous algorithms
    9 Legal issues
    10 Etymology
    11 History: Development of the notion of "algorithm"
        11.1 Discrete and distinguishable symbols
        11.2 Manipulation of symbols as "place holders" for numbers: algebra
        11.3 Mechanical contrivances with discrete states
        11.4 Mathematics during the 19th century up to the mid-20th century
        11.5 Emil Post (1936) and Alan Turing (1936–37, 1939)
        11.6 J. B. Rosser (1939) and S. C. Kleene (1943)
        11.7 History after 1950
    12 See also
    13 Notes
    14 References
        14.1 Secondary references
    15 Further reading
    16 External links

Informal definition

    For a detailed presentation of the various points of view around the definition of "algorithm" see Algorithm characterizations. For examples of simple addition algorithms specified in the detailed manner described in Algorithm characterizations, see Algorithm examples.

While there is no generally accepted formal definition of "algorithm," an informal definition could be "a set of rules that precisely defines a sequence of operations."[11] For some people, a program is only an algorithm if it stops eventually; for others, a program is only an algorithm if it stops before a given number of calculation steps.[12]

A prototypical example of an algorithm is Euclid's algorithm to determine the maximum common divisor of two integers; an example (there are others) is described by the flow chart above and as an example in a later section.

Boolos & Jeffrey (1974, 1999) offer an informal meaning of the word in the following quotation:

    No human being can write fast enough, or long enough, or small enough† ( †"smaller and smaller without limit ...you'd be trying to write on molecules, on atoms, on electrons") to list all members of an enumerably infinite set by writing out their names, one after another, in some notation. But humans can do something equally useful, in the case of certain enumerably infinite sets: They can give explicit instructions for determining the nth member of the set, for arbitrary finite n. Such instructions are to be given quite explicitly, in a form in which they could be followed by a computing machine, or by a human who is capable of carrying out only very elementary operations on symbols.[13]

The term "enumerably infinite" means "countable using integers perhaps extending to infinity." Thus Boolos and Jeffrey are saying that an algorithm implies instructions for a process that "creates" output integers from an arbitrary "input" integer or integers that, in theory, can be chosen from 0 to infinity. Thus an algorithm can be an algebraic equation such as y = m + n—two arbitrary "input variables" m and n that produce an output y. But various authors' attempts to define the notion indicate that the word implies much more than this, something on the order of (for the addition example):

    Precise instructions (in language understood by "the computer")[14] for a fast, efficient, "good"[15] process that specifies the "moves" of "the computer" (machine or human, equipped with the necessary internally contained information and capabilities)[16] to find, decode, and then process arbitrary input integers/symbols m and n, symbols + and = ... and "effectively"[17] produce, in a "reasonable" time,[18] output-integer y at a specified place and in a specified format.

The concept of algorithm is also used to define the notion of decidability. That notion is central for explaining how formal systems come into being starting from a small set of axioms and rules. In logic, the time that an algorithm requires to complete cannot be measured, as it is not apparently related with our customary physical dimension. From such uncertainties, that characterize ongoing work, stems the unavailability of a definition of algorithm that suits both concrete (in some sense) and abstract usage of the term.
Formalization

Algorithms are essential to the way computers process data. Many computer programs contain algorithms that detail the specific instructions a computer should perform (in a specific order) to carry out a specified task, such as calculating employees' paychecks or printing students' report cards. Thus, an algorithm can be considered to be any sequence of operations that can be simulated by a Turing-complete system. Authors who assert this thesis include Minsky (1967), Savage (1987) and Gurevich (2000):

    Minsky: "But we will also maintain, with Turing . . . that any procedure which could "naturally" be called effective, can in fact be realized by a (simple) machine. Although this may seem extreme, the arguments . . . in its favor are hard to refute".[19]

    Gurevich: "...Turing's informal argument in favor of his thesis justifies a stronger thesis: every algorithm can be simulated by a Turing machine ... according to Savage [1987], an algorithm is a computational process defined by a Turing machine".[20]

Typically, when an algorithm is associated with processing information, data is read from an input source, written to an output device, and/or stored for further processing. Stored data is regarded as part of the internal state of the entity performing the algorithm. In practice, the state is stored in one or more data structures.

For some such computational process, the algorithm must be rigorously defined: specified in the way it applies in all possible circumstances that could arise. That is, any conditional steps must be systematically dealt with, case-by-case; the criteria for each case must be clear (and computable).

Because an algorithm is a precise list of precise steps, the order of computation will always be critical to the functioning of the algorithm. Instructions are usually assumed to be listed explicitly, and are described as starting "from the top" and going "down to the bottom", an idea that is described more formally by flow of control.

So far, this discussion of the formalization of an algorithm has assumed the premises of imperative programming. This is the most common conception, and it attempts to describe a task in discrete, "mechanical" means. Unique to this conception of formalized algorithms is the assignment operation, setting the value of a variable. It derives from the intuition of "memory" as a scratchpad. There is an example below of such an assignment.

For some alternate conceptions of what constitutes an algorithm see functional programming and logic programming.
Expressing algorithms

Algorithms can be expressed in many kinds of notation, including natural languages, pseudocode, flowcharts, programming languages or control tables (processed by interpreters). Natural language expressions of algorithms tend to be verbose and ambiguous, and are rarely used for complex or technical algorithms. Pseudocode, flowcharts and control tables are structured ways to express algorithms that avoid many of the ambiguities common in natural language statements. Programming languages are primarily intended for expressing algorithms in a form that can be executed by a computer, but are often used as a way to define or document algorithms.

There is a wide variety of representations possible and one can express a given Turing machine program as a sequence of machine tables (see more at finite state machine, state transition table and control table), as flowcharts (see more at state diagram), or as a form of rudimentary machine code or assembly code called "sets of quadruples" (see more at Turing machine).

Representations of algorithms can be classed into three accepted levels of Turing machine description:[21]

    1 High-level description:

        "...prose to describe an algorithm, ignoring the implementation details. At this level we do not need to mention how the machine manages its tape or head."

    2 Implementation description:

        "...prose used to define the way the Turing machine uses its head and the way that it stores data on its tape. At this level we do not give details of states or transition function."

    3 Formal description:

        Most detailed, "lowest level", gives the Turing machine's "state table".

    For an example of the simple algorithm "Add m+n" described in all three levels see Algorithm examples.

Implementation

Most algorithms are intended to be implemented as computer programs. However, algorithms are also implemented by other means, such as in a biological neural network (for example, the human brain implementing arithmetic or an insect looking for food), in an electrical circuit, or in a mechanical device.
Computer algorithms
Flowchart examples of the canonical Böhm-Jacopini structures: the SEQUENCE (rectangles descending the page), the WHILE-DO and the IF-THEN-ELSE. The three structures are made of the primitive conditional GOTO (IF test=true THEN GOTO step xxx) (a diamond), the unconditional GOTO (rectangle), various assignment operators (rectangle), and HALT (rectangle). Nesting of these structures inside assignment-blocks result in complex diagrams (cf Tausworthe 1977:100,114).

In computer systems, an algorithm is basically an instance of logic written in software by software developers to be effective for the intended "target" computer(s), in order for the target machines to produce output from given input (perhaps null).

"Elegant" (compact) programs, "good" (fast) programs : The notion of "simplicity and elegance" appears informally in Knuth and precisely in Chaitin:

    Knuth: ". . .we want good algorithms in some loosely defined aesthetic sense. One criterion . . . is the length of time taken to perform the algorithm . . .. Other criteria are adaptability of the algorithm to computers, its simplicity and elegance, etc"[22]

    Chaitin: " . . . a program is 'elegant,' by which I mean that it's the smallest possible program for producing the output that it does"[23]

Chaitin prefaces his definition with: "I'll show you can't prove that a program is 'elegant'"—such a proof would solve the Halting problem (ibid).

Algorithm versus function computable by an algorithm: For a given function multiple algorithms may exist. This will be true, even without expanding the available instruction set available to the programmer. Rogers observes that "It is . . . important to distinguish between the notion of algorithm, i.e. procedure and the notion of function computable by algorithm, i.e. mapping yielded by procedure. The same function may have several different algorithms".[24]

Unfortunately there may be a tradeoff between goodness (speed) and elegance (compactness)—an elegant program may take more steps to complete a computation than one less elegant. An example of using Euclid's algorithm will be shown below.

Computers (and computors), models of computation: A computer (or human "computor"[25]) is a restricted type of machine, a "discrete deterministic mechanical device"[26] that blindly follows its instructions.[27] Melzak's and Lambek's primitive models[28] reduced this notion to four elements: (i) discrete, distinguishable locations, (ii) discrete, indistinguishable counters[29] (iii) an agent, and (iv) a list of instructions that are effective relative to the capability of the agent.[30]

Minsky describes a more congenial variation of Lambek's "abacus" model in his "Very Simple Bases for Computability".[31] Minsky's machine proceeds sequentially through its five (or six depending on how one counts) instructions unless either a conditional IF–THEN GOTO or an unconditional GOTO changes program flow out of sequence. Besides HALT, Minsky's machine includes three assignment (replacement, substitution)[32] operations: ZERO (e.g. the contents of location replaced by 0: L ? 0), SUCCESSOR (e.g. L ? L+1), and DECREMENT (e.g. L ? L - 1).[33] Rarely will a programmer have to write "code" with such a limited instruction set. But Minsky shows (as do Melzak and Lambek) that his machine is Turing complete with only four general types of instructions: conditional GOTO, unconditional GOTO, assignment/replacement/substitution, and HALT.[34]

Simulation of an algorithm: computer (computor) language: Knuth advises the reader that "the best way to learn an algorithm is to try it . . . immediately take pen and paper and work through an example".[35] But what about a simulation or execution of the real thing? The programmer must translate the algorithm into a language that the simulator/computer/computor can effectively execute. Stone gives an example of this: when computing the roots of a quadratic equation the computor must know how to take a square root. If they don't then for the algorithm to be effective it must provide a set of rules for extracting a square root.[36]

This means that the programmer must know a "language" that is effective relative to the target computing agent (computer/computor).

But what model should be used for the simulation? Van Emde Boas observes "even if we base complexity theory on abstract instead of concrete machines, arbitrariness of the choice of a model remains. It is at this point that the notion of simulation enters".[37] When speed is being measured, the instruction set matters. For example, the subprogram in Euclid's algorithm to compute the remainder would execute much faster if the programmer had a "modulus" (division) instruction available rather than just subtraction (or worse: just Minsky's "decrement").

Structured programming, canonical structures: Per the Church-Turing thesis any algorithm can be computed by a model known to be Turing complete, and per Minsky's demonstrations Turing completeness requires only four instruction types—conditional GOTO, unconditional GOTO, assignment, HALT. Kemeny and Kurtz observe that while "undisciplined" use of unconditional GOTOs and conditional IF-THEN GOTOs can result in "spaghetti code" a programmer can write structured programs using these instructions; on the other hand "it is also possible, and not too hard, to write badly structured programs in a structured language".[38] Tausworthe augments the three Böhm-Jacopini canonical structures:[39] SEQUENCE, IF-THEN-ELSE, and WHILE-DO, with two more: DO-WHILE and CASE.[40] An additional benefit of a structured program will be one that lends itself to proofs of correctness using mathematical induction.[41]

Canonical flowchart symbols[42]: The graphical aide called a flowchart offers a way to describe and document an algorithm (and a computer program of one). Like program flow of a Minsky machine, a flowchart always starts at the top of a page and proceeds down. Its primary symbols are only 4: the directed arrow showing program flow, the rectangle (SEQUENCE, GOTO), the diamond (IF-THEN-ELSE), and the dot (OR-tie). The Böhm-Jacopini canonical structures are made of these primitive shapes. Sub-structures can "nest" in rectangles but only if a single exit occurs from the superstructure. The symbols and their use to build the canonical structures are shown in the diagram.
Examples
Further information: Algorithm examples
Sorting example
An animation of the quicksort algorithm sorting an array of randomized values. The red bars mark the pivot element; at the start of the animation, the element farthest to the right hand side is chosen as the pivot.

One of the simplest algorithms is to find the largest number in an (unsorted) list of numbers. The solution necessarily requires looking at every number in the list, but only once at each. From this follows a simple algorithm, which can be stated in a high-level description English prose, as:

High-level description:

    Assume the first item is largest.
    Look at each of the remaining items in the list and if it is larger than the largest item so far, make a note of it.
    The last noted item is the largest in the list when the process is complete.

(Quasi-)formal description: Written in prose but much closer to the high-level language of a computer program, the following is the more formal coding of the algorithm in pseudocode or pidgin code:

Algorithm LargestNumber
  Input: A non-empty list of numbers L.
  Output: The largest number in the list L.

  largest ? L0
  for each item in the list (Length(L)=1), do
    if the item > largest, then
      largest ? the item
  return largest

    "?" is a shorthand for "changes to". For instance, "largest ? item" means that the value of largest changes to the value of item.
    "return" terminates the algorithm and outputs the value that follows.

Euclid’s algorithm
The example-diagram of Euclid's algorithm from T.L. Heath 1908 with more detail added. Euclid does not go beyond a third measuring and gives no numerical examples. Nicomachus gives the example of 49 and 21: "I subtract the less from the greater; 28 is left; then again I subtract from this the same 21 (for this is possible); 7 is left; I subtact this from 21, 14 is left; from which I again subtract 7 (for this is possible); 7 will be left, but 7 cannot be subtracted from 7." Heath comments that "The last phrase is curious, but the meaning of it is obvious enough, as also the meaning of the phrase about ending "at one and the same number"(Heath 1908:300).

Euclid’s algorithm appears as Proposition II in Book VII ("Elementary Number Theory") of his Elements.[43] Euclid poses the problem: "Given two numbers not prime to one another, to find their greatest common measure". He defines "A number [to be] a multitude composed of units": a counting number, a positive integer not including 0. And to "measure" is to place a shorter measuring length s successively (q times) along longer length l until the remaining portion r is less than the shorter length s.[44] In modern words, remainder r = l - q*s, q being the quotient, or remainder r is the "modulus", the integer-fractional part left over after the division.[45]

For Euclid’s method to succeed, the starting lengths must satisfy two requirements: (i) the lengths must not be 0, AND (ii) the subtraction must be “proper”, a test must guarantee that the smaller of the two numbers is subtracted from the larger (alternately, the two can be equal so their subtraction yields 0).

Euclid's original proof adds a third: the two lengths are not prime to one another. Euclid stipulated this so that he could construct a reductio ad absurdum proof that the two numbers' common measure is in fact the greatest.[46] While Nicomachus' algorithm is the same as Euclid's, when the numbers are prime to one another it yields the number "1" for their common measure. So to be precise the following is really Nicomachus' algorithm.
Example
A graphical expression on Euclid's algorithm using example with 1599 and 650.

Example of 1599 and 650:
Step 1 	1599 = 650*2 + 299
Step 2 	650 = 299*2 + 52
Step 3 	299 = 52*5 + 39
Step 4 	52 = 39*1 + 13
Step 5 	39 = 13*3 + 0
Computer language for Euclid's algorithm

Only a few instruction types are required to execute Euclid's algorithm—some logical tests (conditional GOTO), unconditional GOTO, assignment (replacement), and subtraction.

    A location is symbolized by upper case letter(s), e.g. S, A, etc.
    The varying quantity (number) in a location will be written in lower case letter(s) and (usually) associated with the location's name. For example, location L at the start might contain the number l = 3009.

An inelegant program for Euclid's algorithm
"Inelegant" is a translation of Knuth's version of the algorithm with a subtraction-based remainder-loop replacing his use of division (or a "modulus" instruction). Derived from Knuth 1973:2–4. Depending on the two numbers "Inelegant" may compute the g.c.d. in fewer steps than "Elegant".

The following algorithm is framed as Knuth's 4-step version of Euclid's and Nichomachus', but rather than using division to find the remainder it uses successive subtractions of the shorter length s from the remaining length r until r is less than s. The high-level description, shown in boldface, is adapted from Knuth 1973:2–4:

INPUT:

    1 [Into two locations L and S put the numbers l and s that represent the two lengths]: INPUT L, S
    2 [Initialize R: make the remaining length r equal to the starting/initial/input length l] R ? L

E0: [Insure r = s.]

    3 [Insure the smaller of the two numbers is in S and the larger in R]: IF R > S THEN the contents of L is the larger number so skip over the exchange-steps 4, 5 and 6: GOTO step 6 ELSE swap the contents of R and S.]
    4 L ? R (this first step is redundant, but will be useful for later discussion).
    5 R ? S
    6 S ? L

E1:[Find remainder]: Until the remaining length r in R is less than the shorter length s in S, repeatedly subtract the measuring number s in S from the remaining length r in R.

    7 IF S > R THEN done measuring so GOTO 10 ELSE measure again,
    8 R ? R - S
    9 [Remainder-loop]: GOTO 7.

E2: [Is the remainder 0?]: EITHER (i) the last measure was exact and the remainder in R is 0 program can halt, OR (ii) the algorithm must continue: the last measure left a remainder in R less than measuring number in S.

    10 IF R = 0 then done so GOTO step 15 ELSE continue to step 11,

E3: [Interchange s and r ]: The nut of Euclid's algorithm. Use remainder r to measure what was previously smaller number s:; L serves as a temporary location.

    11 L ? R
    12 R ? S
    13 S ? L
    14 [Repeat the measuring process]: GOTO 7

OUTPUT:

    15 [Done. S contains the greatest common divisor]: PRINT S

DONE:

    16 HALT, END, STOP.

An elegant program for Euclid's algorithm

The following version of Euclid's algorithm requires only 6 core instructions to do what 13 are required to do by "Inelegant"; worse, "Inelegant" requires more types of instructions. The flowchart of "Elegant" can be found at the top of this article. In the (unstructured) Basic language the steps are numbered, and the instruction LET [ ] = [ ] is the assignment instruction symbolized by ?.

   5 REM Euclid's algorithm for greatest common divisor
   6 PRINT "Type two integers greater than 0"
   10 INPUT A,B
   20 IF B=0 THEN GOTO 80
   30 IF A > B THEN GOTO 60
   40 LET B=B-A
   50 GOTO 20
   60 LET A=A-B
   70 GOTO 20
   80 PRINT A
   90 END

How "Elegant" works: In place of an outer "Euclid loop", "Elegant" shifts back and forth between two "co-loops", an A > B loop that computes A ? A - B, and a B = A loop that computes B ? B - A. This works because, when at last the minuend M is less than or equal to the subtrahend S ( Difference = Minuend - Subtrahend), the minuend can become s (the new measuring length) and the subtrahend can become the new r (the length to be measured); in other words the "sense" of the subtraction reverses.
Testing the Euclid algorithms

Does an algorithm do what its author wants it to do? A few test cases usually suffice to confirm core functionality. One source[47] uses 3009 and 884. Knuth suggested 40902, 24140. Another interesting case is the two relatively prime numbers 14157 and 5950.

But exceptional cases must be identified and tested. Will "Inelegant" perform properly when R > S, S > R, R = S? Ditto for "Elegant": B > A, A > B, A = B? (Yes to all). What happens when one number is zero, both numbers are zero? ("Inelegant" computes forever in all cases; "Elegant" computes forever when A = 0.) What happens if negative numbers are entered? Fractional numbers? If the input numbers, i.e. the domain of the function computed by the algorithm/program, is to include only positive integers including zero, then the failures at zero indicate that the algorithm (and the program that instantiates it) is a partial function rather than a total function. A notable failure due to exceptions is the Ariane V rocket failure.

Proof of program correctness by use of mathematical induction: Knuth demonstrates the application of mathematical induction to an "extended" version of Euclid's algorithm, and he proposes "a general method applicable to proving the validity of any algorithm".[48] Tausworthe proposes that a measure of the complexity of a program be the length of its correctness proof.[49]
Measuring and improving the Euclid algorithms

Elegance (compactness) versus goodness (speed) : With only 6 core instructions, "Elegant" is the clear winner compared to "Inelegant" at 13 instructions. However, "Inelegant" is faster (it arrives at HALT in fewer steps). Algorithm analysis[50] indicates why this is the case: "Elegant" does two conditional tests in every subtraction loop, whereas "Inelegant" only does one. As the algorithm (usually) requires many loop-throughs, on average much time is wasted doing a "B = 0?" test that is needed only after the remainder is computed.

Can the algorithms be improved?: Once the programmer judges a program "fit" and "effective"—that is, it computes the function intended by its author—then the question becomes, can it be improved?

The compactness of "Inelegant" can be improved by the elimination of 5 steps. But Chaitin proved that compacting an algorithm cannot be automated by a generalized algorithm;[51] rather, it can only be done heuristically, i.e. by exhaustive search (examples to be found at Busy beaver), trial and error, cleverness, insight, application of inductive reasoning, etc. Observe that steps 4, 5 and 6 are repeated in steps 11, 12 and 13. Comparison with "Elegant" provides a hint that these steps together with steps 2 and 3 can be eliminated. This reduces the number of core instructions from 13 to 8, which makes it "more elegant" than "Elegant" at 9 steps.

The speed of "Elegant" can be improved by moving the B=0? test outside of the two subtraction loops. This change calls for the addition of 3 instructions (B=0?, A=0?, GOTO). Now "Elegant" computes the example-numbers faster; whether for any given A, B and R, S this is always the case would require a detailed analysis.
Algorithmic analysis
Main article: Analysis of algorithms

It is frequently important to know how much of a particular resource (such as time or storage) is theoretically required for a given algorithm. Methods have been developed for the analysis of algorithms to obtain such quantitative answers (estimates); for example, the sorting algorithm above has a time requirement of O(n), using the big O notation with n as the length of the list. At all times the algorithm only needs to remember two values: the largest number found so far, and its current position in the input list. Therefore it is said to have a space requirement of O(1), if the space required to store the input numbers is not counted, or O(n) if it is counted.

Different algorithms may complete the same task with a different set of instructions in less or more time, space, or 'effort' than others. For example, a binary search algorithm will usually outperform a brute force sequential search when used for table lookups on sorted lists.
Formal versus empirical
Main articles: Empirical algorithmics, Profiling (computer programming), and Program optimization

The analysis and study of algorithms is a discipline of computer science, and is often practiced abstractly without the use of a specific programming language or implementation. In this sense, algorithm analysis resembles other mathematical disciplines in that it focuses on the underlying properties of the algorithm and not on the specifics of any particular implementation. Usually pseudocode is used for analysis as it is the simplest and most general representation. However, ultimately, most algorithms are usually implemented on particular hardware / software platforms and their algorithmic efficiency is eventually put to the test using real code. For the solution of a "one off" problem, the efficiency of a particulr algorithm may not have significant consequences (unless n is extremly large) but for algorithms designed for fast interactive, commercial or long life scientific usage it may be critical. Scaling from small n to large n frequently exposes inefficient algorithms that are otherwise benign.

Empirical testing is useful because it may uncover unexpected interactions that affect performance. Benchmarks may be used to compare before/after potential improvements to an algorithm after program optimization.
FFT speedup
Main article: Algorithmic efficiency

To illustrate the potential improvements possible even in some extremely "well established" algorithms, a recent significant innovation, relating to FFT algorithms (used very heavily in the field of image processing), may have decreased processing times by a factor as high as 10,000 . The impact of this speedup enables, for example, portable computing devices (as well as other devices) to consume less power[52]
Classification

There are various ways to classify algorithms, each with its own merits.
By implementation

One way to classify algorithms is by implementation means.

    Recursion or iteration: A recursive algorithm is one that invokes (makes reference to) itself repeatedly until a certain condition matches, which is a method common to functional programming. Iterative algorithms use repetitive constructs like loops and sometimes additional data structures like stacks to solve the given problems. Some problems are naturally suited for one implementation or the other. For example, towers of Hanoi is a well understood in recursive implementation. Every recursive version has an equivalent (but possibly more or less complex) iterative version, and vice versa.
    Logical: An algorithm may be viewed as controlled logical deduction. This notion may be expressed as: Algorithm = logic + control.[53] The logic component expresses the axioms that may be used in the computation and the control component determines the way in which deduction is applied to the axioms. This is the basis for the logic programming paradigm. In pure logic programming languages the control component is fixed and algorithms are specified by supplying only the logic component. The appeal of this approach is the elegant semantics: a change in the axioms has a well-defined change in the algorithm.
    Serial or parallel or distributed: Algorithms are usually discussed with the assumption that computers execute one instruction of an algorithm at a time. Those computers are sometimes called serial computers. An algorithm designed for such an environment is called a serial algorithm, as opposed to parallel algorithms or distributed algorithms. Parallel algorithms take advantage of computer architectures where several processors can work on a problem at the same time, whereas distributed algorithms utilize multiple machines connected with a network. Parallel or distributed algorithms divide the problem into more symmetrical or asymmetrical subproblems and collect the results back together. The resource consumption in such algorithms is not only processor cycles on each processor but also the communication overhead between the processors. Sorting algorithms can be parallelized efficiently, but their communication overhead is expensive. Iterative algorithms are generally parallelizable. Some problems have no parallel algorithms, and are called inherently serial problems.
    Deterministic or non-deterministic: Deterministic algorithms solve the problem with exact decision at every step of the algorithm whereas non-deterministic algorithms solve problems via guessing although typical guesses are made more accurate through the use of heuristics.
    Exact or approximate: While many algorithms reach an exact solution, approximation algorithms seek an approximation that is close to the true solution. Approximation may use either a deterministic or a random strategy. Such algorithms have practical value for many hard problems.
    Quantum algorithm run on a realistic model of quantum computation. The term is usually used for those algorithms which seem inherently quantum, or use some essential feature of quantum computation such as quantum superposition or quantum entanglement.

By design paradigm

Another way of classifying algorithms is by their design methodology or paradigm. There is a certain number of paradigms, each different from the other. Furthermore, each of these categories will include many different types of algorithms. Some commonly found paradigms include:

    Brute-force or exhaustive search. This is the naïve method of trying every possible solution to see which is best.[54]
    Divide and conquer. A divide and conquer algorithm repeatedly reduces an instance of a problem to one or more smaller instances of the same problem (usually recursively) until the instances are small enough to solve easily. One such example of divide and conquer is merge sorting. Sorting can be done on each segment of data after dividing data into segments and sorting of entire data can be obtained in the conquer phase by merging the segments. A simpler variant of divide and conquer is called a decrease and conquer algorithm, that solves an identical subproblem and uses the solution of this subproblem to solve the bigger problem. Divide and conquer divides the problem into multiple subproblems and so the conquer stage will be more complex than decrease and conquer algorithms. An example of decrease and conquer algorithm is the binary search algorithm.
    Dynamic programming. When a problem shows optimal substructure, meaning the optimal solution to a problem can be constructed from optimal solutions to subproblems, and overlapping subproblems, meaning the same subproblems are used to solve many different problem instances, a quicker approach called dynamic programming avoids recomputing solutions that have already been computed. For example, Floyd–Warshall algorithm, the shortest path to a goal from a vertex in a weighted graph can be found by using the shortest path to the goal from all adjacent vertices. Dynamic programming and memoization go together. The main difference between dynamic programming and divide and conquer is that subproblems are more or less independent in divide and conquer, whereas subproblems overlap in dynamic programming. The difference between dynamic programming and straightforward recursion is in caching or memoization of recursive calls. When subproblems are independent and there is no repetition, memoization does not help; hence dynamic programming is not a solution for all complex problems. By using memoization or maintaining a table of subproblems already solved, dynamic programming reduces the exponential nature of many problems to polynomial complexity.
    The greedy method. A greedy algorithm is similar to a dynamic programming algorithm, but the difference is that solutions to the subproblems do not have to be known at each stage; instead a "greedy" choice can be made of what looks best for the moment. The greedy method extends the solution with the best possible decision (not all feasible decisions) at an algorithmic stage based on the current local optimum and the best decision (not all possible decisions) made in a previous stage. It is not exhaustive, and does not give an accurate answer to many problems. But when it works, it will be the fastest method. The most popular greedy algorithm is finding the minimal spanning tree as given by Huffman Tree, Kruskal, Prim, Sollin.
    Linear programming. When solving a problem using linear programming, specific inequalities involving the inputs are found and then an attempt is made to maximize (or minimize) some linear function of the inputs. Many problems (such as the maximum flow for directed graphs) can be stated in a linear programming way, and then be solved by a 'generic' algorithm such as the simplex algorithm. A more complex variant of linear programming is called integer programming, where the solution space is restricted to the integers.
    Reduction. This technique involves solving a difficult problem by transforming it into a better known problem for which we have (hopefully) asymptotically optimal algorithms. The goal is to find a reducing algorithm whose complexity is not dominated by the resulting reduced algorithm's. For example, one selection algorithm for finding the median in an unsorted list involves first sorting the list (the expensive portion) and then pulling out the middle element in the sorted list (the cheap portion). This technique is also known as transform and conquer.
    Search and enumeration. Many problems (such as playing chess) can be modeled as problems on graphs. A graph exploration algorithm specifies rules for moving around a graph and is useful for such problems. This category also includes search algorithms, branch and bound enumeration and backtracking.

    Randomized algorithms are those that make some choices randomly (or pseudo-randomly); for some problems, it can in fact be proven that the fastest solutions must involve some randomness. There are two large classes of such algorithms:
        Monte Carlo algorithms return a correct answer with high-probability. E.g. RP is the subclass of these that run in polynomial time)
        Las Vegas algorithms always return the correct answer, but their running time is only probabilistically bound, e.g. ZPP.
    In optimization problems, heuristic algorithms do not try to find an optimal solution, but an approximate solution where the time or resources are limited. They are not practical to find perfect solutions. An example of this would be local search, tabu search, or simulated annealing algorithms, a class of heuristic probabilistic algorithms that vary the solution of a problem by a random amount. The name "simulated annealing" alludes to the metallurgic term meaning the heating and cooling of metal to achieve freedom from defects. The purpose of the random variance is to find close to globally optimal solutions rather than simply locally optimal ones, the idea being that the random element will be decreased as the algorithm settles down to a solution. Approximation algorithms are those heuristic algorithms that additionally provide some bounds on the error. Genetic algorithms attempt to find solutions to problems by mimicking biological evolutionary processes, with a cycle of random mutations yielding successive generations of "solutions". Thus, they emulate reproduction and "survival of the fittest". In genetic programming, this approach is extended to algorithms, by regarding the algorithm itself as a "solution" to a problem.

By field of study
See also: List of algorithms

Every field of science has its own problems and needs efficient algorithms. Related problems in one field are often studied together. Some example classes are search algorithms, sorting algorithms, merge algorithms, numerical algorithms, graph algorithms, string algorithms, computational geometric algorithms, combinatorial algorithms, medical algorithms, machine learning, cryptography, data compression algorithms and parsing techniques.

Fields tend to overlap with each other, and algorithm advances in one field may improve those of other, sometimes completely unrelated, fields. For example, dynamic programming was invented for optimization of resource consumption in industry, but is now used in solving a broad range of problems in many fields.
By complexity
See also: Complexity class and Parameterized complexity

Algorithms can be classified by the amount of time they need to complete compared to their input size. There is a wide variety: some algorithms complete in linear time relative to input size, some do so in an exponential amount of time or even worse, and some never halt. Additionally, some problems may have multiple algorithms of differing complexity, while other problems might have no algorithms or no known efficient algorithms. There are also mappings from some problems to other problems. Owing to this, it was found to be more suitable to classify the problems themselves instead of the algorithms into equivalence classes based on the complexity of the best possible algorithms for them.

Burgin (2005, p. 24) uses a generalized definition of algorithms that relaxes the common requirement that the output of the algorithm that computes a function must be determined after a finite number of steps. He defines a super-recursive class of algorithms as "a class of algorithms in which it is possible to compute functions not computable by any Turing machine" (Burgin 2005, p. 107). This is closely related to the study of methods of hypercomputation.
Continuous algorithms

The adjective "continuous" when applied to the word "algorithm" can mean:

    An algorithm operating on data that represents continuous quantities, even though this data is represented by discrete approximations—such algorithms are studied in numerical analysis; or
    An algorithm in the form of a differential equation that operates continuously on the data, running on an analog computer.[55]

Legal issues

    See also: Software patents for a general overview of the patentability of software, including computer-implemented algorithms.

Algorithms, by themselves, are not usually patentable. In the United States, a claim consisting solely of simple manipulations of abstract concepts, numbers, or signals does not constitute "processes" (USPTO 2006), and hence algorithms are not patentable (as in Gottschalk v. Benson). However, practical applications of algorithms are sometimes patentable. For example, in Diamond v. Diehr, the application of a simple feedback algorithm to aid in the curing of synthetic rubber was deemed patentable. The patenting of software is highly controversial, and there are highly criticized patents involving algorithms, especially data compression algorithms, such as Unisys' LZW patent.

Additionally, some cryptographic algorithms have export restrictions (see export of cryptography).
Etymology

The word "Algorithm", or "Algorism" in some other writing versions, comes from the name al-Khwarizmi, pronounced in classical Arabic as Al-Khwarithmi. Al-Khwarizmi (Persian ???????, c. 780-850) was a Persian mathematician, astronomer, geographer and a scholar in the House of Wisdom in Baghdad, whose name means "the native of Khwarezm", a city that was part of the Greater Iran during his era and now is in modern day Uzbekistan[56][57][58] He wrote a treatise in the Arabic language during the 9th century, which was translated into Latin in the 12th century under the title Algoritmi de numero Indorum. This title means "Algoritmi on the numbers of the Indians", where "Algoritmi" was the translator's Latinization of Al-Khwarizmi's name.[59] Al-Khwarizmi was the most widely read mathematician in Europe in the late Middle Ages, primarily through his other book, the Algebra.[60] In late medieval Latin, algorismus, the corruption of his name, simply meant the "decimal number system" that is still the meaning of modern English algorism. In 17th century French the word's form, but not its meaning, changed to algorithme. English adopted the French very soon afterwards, but it wasn't until the late 19th century that "Algorithm" took on the meaning that it has in modern English.[61]
History: Development of the notion of "algorithm"
Discrete and distinguishable symbols

Tally-marks: To keep track of their flocks, their sacks of grain and their money the ancients used tallying: accumulating stones or marks scratched on sticks, or making discrete symbols in clay. Through the Babylonian and Egyptian use of marks and symbols, eventually Roman numerals and the abacus evolved (Dilson, p. 16–41). Tally marks appear prominently in unary numeral system arithmetic used in Turing machine and Post–Turing machine computations.
Manipulation of symbols as "place holders" for numbers: algebra

The work of the ancient Greek geometers (Euclidean algorithm), Persian mathematician Al-Khwarizmi (from whose name the terms "algorism" and "algorithm" are derived), and Western European mathematicians culminated in Leibniz's notion of the calculus ratiocinator (ca 1680):

    A good century and a half ahead of his time, Leibniz proposed an algebra of logic, an algebra that would specify the rules for manipulating logical concepts in the manner that ordinary algebra specifies the rules for manipulating numbers.[62]

Mechanical contrivances with discrete states

The clock: Bolter credits the invention of the weight-driven clock as "The key invention [of Europe in the Middle Ages]", in particular the verge escapement[63] that provides us with the tick and tock of a mechanical clock. "The accurate automatic machine"[64] led immediately to "mechanical automata" beginning in the 13th century and finally to "computational machines"—the difference engine and analytical engines of Charles Babbage and Countess Ada Lovelace.[65]

Logical machines 1870—Stanley Jevons' "logical abacus" and "logical machine": The technical problem was to reduce Boolean equations when presented in a form similar to what are now known as Karnaugh maps. Jevons (1880) describes first a simple "abacus" of "slips of wood furnished with pins, contrived so that any part or class of the [logical] combinations can be picked out mechanically . . . More recently however I have reduced the system to a completely mechanical form, and have thus embodied the whole of the indirect process of inference in what may be called a Logical Machine" His machine came equipped with "certain moveable wooden rods" and "at the foot are 21 keys like those of a piano [etc] . . .". With this machine he could analyze a "syllogism or any other simple logical argument".[66]

This machine he displayed in 1870 before the Fellows of the Royal Society.[67] Another logician John Venn, however, in his 1881 Symbolic Logic, turned a jaundiced eye to this effort: "I have no high estimate myself of the interest or importance of what are sometimes called logical machines ... it does not seem to me that any contrivances at present known or likely to be discovered really deserve the name of logical machines"; see more at Algorithm characterizations. But not to be outdone he too presented "a plan somewhat analogous, I apprehend, to Prof. Jevon's abacus ... [And] [a]gain, corresponding to Prof. Jevons's logical machine, the following contrivance may be described. I prefer to call it merely a logical-diagram machine ... but I suppose that it could do very completely all that can be rationally expected of any logical machine".[68]

Jacquard loom, Hollerith punch cards, telegraphy and telephony—the electromechanical relay: Bell and Newell (1971) indicate that the Jacquard loom (1801), precursor to Hollerith cards (punch cards, 1887), and "telephone switching technologies" were the roots of a tree leading to the development of the first computers.[69] By the mid-19th century the telegraph, the precursor of the telephone, was in use throughout the world, its discrete and distinguishable encoding of letters as "dots and dashes" a common sound. By the late 19th century the ticker tape (ca 1870s) was in use, as was the use of Hollerith cards in the 1890 U.S. census. Then came the teleprinter (ca. 1910) with its punched-paper use of Baudot code on tape.

Telephone-switching networks of electromechanical relays (invented 1835) was behind the work of George Stibitz (1937), the inventor of the digital adding device. As he worked in Bell Laboratories, he observed the "burdensome' use of mechanical calculators with gears. "He went home one evening in 1937 intending to test his idea... When the tinkering was over, Stibitz had constructed a binary adding device".[70]

Davis (2000) observes the particular importance of the electromechanical relay (with its two "binary states" open and closed):

    It was only with the development, beginning in the 1930s, of electromechanical calculators using electrical relays, that machines were built having the scope Babbage had envisioned."[71]

Mathematics during the 19th century up to the mid-20th century

Symbols and rules: In rapid succession the mathematics of George Boole (1847, 1854), Gottlob Frege (1879), and Giuseppe Peano (1888–1889) reduced arithmetic to a sequence of symbols manipulated by rules. Peano's The principles of arithmetic, presented by a new method (1888) was "the first attempt at an axiomatization of mathematics in a symbolic language".[72]

But Heijenoort gives Frege (1879) this kudos: Frege's is "perhaps the most important single work ever written in logic. ... in which we see a " 'formula language', that is a lingua characterica, a language written with special symbols, "for pure thought", that is, free from rhetorical embellishments ... constructed from specific symbols that are manipulated according to definite rules".[73] The work of Frege was further simplified and amplified by Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell in their Principia Mathematica (1910–1913).

The paradoxes: At the same time a number of disturbing paradoxes appeared in the literature, in particular the Burali-Forti paradox (1897), the Russell paradox (1902–03), and the Richard Paradox.[74] The resultant considerations led to Kurt Gödel's paper (1931)—he specifically cites the paradox of the liar—that completely reduces rules of recursion to numbers.

Effective calculability: In an effort to solve the Entscheidungsproblem defined precisely by Hilbert in 1928, mathematicians first set about to define what was meant by an "effective method" or "effective calculation" or "effective calculability" (i.e., a calculation that would succeed). In rapid succession the following appeared: Alonzo Church, Stephen Kleene and J.B. Rosser's ?-calculus[75] a finely honed definition of "general recursion" from the work of Gödel acting on suggestions of Jacques Herbrand (cf. Gödel's Princeton lectures of 1934) and subsequent simplifications by Kleene.[76] Church's proof[77] that the Entscheidungsproblem was unsolvable, Emil Post's definition of effective calculability as a worker mindlessly following a list of instructions to move left or right through a sequence of rooms and while there either mark or erase a paper or observe the paper and make a yes-no decision about the next instruction.[78] Alan Turing's proof of that the Entscheidungsproblem was unsolvable by use of his "a- [automatic-] machine"[79]—in effect almost identical to Post's "formulation", J. Barkley Rosser's definition of "effective method" in terms of "a machine".[80] S. C. Kleene's proposal of a precursor to "Church thesis" that he called "Thesis I",[81] and a few years later Kleene's renaming his Thesis "Church's Thesis"[82] and proposing "Turing's Thesis".[83]
Emil Post (1936) and Alan Turing (1936–37, 1939)

Here is a remarkable coincidence of two men not knowing each other but describing a process of men-as-computers working on computations—and they yield virtually identical definitions.

Emil Post (1936) described the actions of a "computer" (human being) as follows:

    "...two concepts are involved: that of a symbol space in which the work leading from problem to answer is to be carried out, and a fixed unalterable set of directions.

His symbol space would be

    "a two way infinite sequence of spaces or boxes... The problem solver or worker is to move and work in this symbol space, being capable of being in, and operating in but one box at a time.... a box is to admit of but two possible conditions, i.e., being empty or unmarked, and having a single mark in it, say a vertical stroke.

    "One box is to be singled out and called the starting point. ...a specific problem is to be given in symbolic form by a finite number of boxes [i.e., INPUT] being marked with a stroke. Likewise the answer [i.e., OUTPUT] is to be given in symbolic form by such a configuration of marked boxes....

    "A set of directions applicable to a general problem sets up a deterministic process when applied to each specific problem. This process will terminate only when it comes to the direction of type (C ) [i.e., STOP]".[84] See more at Post–Turing machine

Alan Turing's work[85] preceded that of Stibitz (1937); it is unknown whether Stibitz knew of the work of Turing. Turing's biographer believed that Turing's use of a typewriter-like model derived from a youthful interest: "Alan had dreamt of inventing typewriters as a boy; Mrs. Turing had a typewriter; and he could well have begun by asking himself what was meant by calling a typewriter 'mechanical'".[86] Given the prevalence of Morse code and telegraphy, ticker tape machines, and teletypewriters we might conjecture that all were influences.

Turing—his model of computation is now called a Turing machine—begins, as did Post, with an analysis of a human computer that he whittles down to a simple set of basic motions and "states of mind". But he continues a step further and creates a machine as a model of computation of numbers.[87]

    "Computing is normally done by writing certain symbols on paper. We may suppose this paper is divided into squares like a child's arithmetic book....I assume then that the computation is carried out on one-dimensional paper, i.e., on a tape divided into squares. I shall also suppose that the number of symbols which may be printed is finite....

    "The behavior of the computer at any moment is determined by the symbols which he is observing, and his "state of mind" at that moment. We may suppose that there is a bound B to the number of symbols or squares which the computer can observe at one moment. If he wishes to observe more, he must use successive observations. We will also suppose that the number of states of mind which need be taken into account is finite...

    "Let us imagine that the operations performed by the computer to be split up into 'simple operations' which are so elementary that it is not easy to imagine them further divided".[88]

Turing's reduction yields the following:

    "The simple operations must therefore include:

        "(a) Changes of the symbol on one of the observed squares
        "(b) Changes of one of the squares observed to another square within L squares of one of the previously observed squares.

"It may be that some of these change necessarily invoke a change of state of mind. The most general single operation must therefore be taken to be one of the following:

        "(A) A possible change (a) of symbol together with a possible change of state of mind.
        "(B) A possible change (b) of observed squares, together with a possible change of state of mind"

    "We may now construct a machine to do the work of this computer".[88]

A few years later, Turing expanded his analysis (thesis, definition) with this forceful expression of it:

    "A function is said to be "effectively calculable" if its values can be found by some purely mechanical process. Although it is fairly easy to get an intuitive grasp of this idea, it is nevertheless desirable to have some more definite, mathematical expressible definition . . . [he discusses the history of the definition pretty much as presented above with respect to Gödel, Herbrand, Kleene, Church, Turing and Post] . . . We may take this statement literally, understanding by a purely mechanical process one which could be carried out by a machine. It is possible to give a mathematical description, in a certain normal form, of the structures of these machines. The development of these ideas leads to the author's definition of a computable function, and to an identification of computability † with effective calculability . . . .

        "† We shall use the expression "computable function" to mean a function calculable by a machine, and we let "effectively calculable" refer to the intuitive idea without particular identification with any one of these definitions".[89]

J. B. Rosser (1939) and S. C. Kleene (1943)

J. Barkley Rosser defined an 'effective [mathematical] method' in the following manner (boldface added):

    "'Effective method' is used here in the rather special sense of a method each step of which is precisely determined and which is certain to produce the answer in a finite number of steps. With this special meaning, three different precise definitions have been given to date. [his footnote #5; see discussion immediately below]. The simplest of these to state (due to Post and Turing) says essentially that an effective method of solving certain sets of problems exists if one can build a machine which will then solve any problem of the set with no human intervention beyond inserting the question and (later) reading the answer. All three definitions are equivalent, so it doesn't matter which one is used. Moreover, the fact that all three are equivalent is a very strong argument for the correctness of any one." (Rosser 1939:225–6)

Rosser's footnote #5 references the work of (1) Church and Kleene and their definition of ?-definability, in particular Church's use of it in his An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory (1936); (2) Herbrand and Gödel and their use of recursion in particular Gödel's use in his famous paper On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica and Related Systems I (1931); and (3) Post (1936) and Turing (1936–7) in their mechanism-models of computation.

Stephen C. Kleene defined as his now-famous "Thesis I" known as the Church–Turing thesis. But he did this in the following context (boldface in original):

    "12. Algorithmic theories... In setting up a complete algorithmic theory, what we do is to describe a procedure, performable for each set of values of the independent variables, which procedure necessarily terminates and in such manner that from the outcome we can read a definite answer, "yes" or "no," to the question, "is the predicate value true?"" (Kleene 1943:273)

History after 1950

A number of efforts have been directed toward further refinement of the definition of "algorithm", and activity is on-going because of issues surrounding, in particular, foundations of mathematics (especially the Church–Turing thesis) and philosophy of mind (especially arguments around artificial intelligence). For more, see Algorithm characterizations.
See also

    Abstract machine
    Algorithm engineering
    Algorithmic composition
    Algorithmic trading
    Garbage in, garbage out
    High-level synthesis Algorithmic synthesis
    List of important publications in theoretical computer science - Algorithms
    Introduction to Algorithms
    List of algorithm general topics
    Numerical Mathematics Consortium
    Theory of computation
        Computability theory
        Computational complexity theory

Notes

    ^ "Any classical mathematical algorithm, for example, can be described in a finite number of English words" (Rogers 1987:2).
    ^ Well defined with respect to the agent that executes the algorithm: "There is a computing agent, usually human, which can react to the instructions and carry out the computations" (Rogers 1987:2).
    ^ "an algorithm is a procedure for computing a function (with respect to some chosen notation for integers) . . . this limitation (to numerical functions) results in no loss of generality", (Rogers 1987:1).
    ^ "An algorithm has zero or more inputs, i.e., quantities which are given to it initially before the algorithm begins" (Knuth 1973:5).
    ^ "A procedure which has all the characteristics of an algorithm except that it possibly lacks finiteness may be called a 'computational method'" (Knuth 1973:5).
    ^ "An algorithm has one or more outputs, i.e. quantities which have a specified relation to the inputs" (Knuth 1973:5).
    ^ Whether or not a process with random interior processes (not including the input) is an algorithm is debatable. Rogers opines that: "a computation is carried out in a discrete stepwise fashion, without use of continuous methods or analogue devices . . . carried forward deterministically, without resort to random methods or devices, e.g., dice" Rogers 1987:2).
    ^ Kleene 1943 in Davis 1965:274
    ^ Rosser 1939 in Davis 1965:225
    ^ Moschovakis, Yiannis N. (2001). "What is an algorithm?". In Engquist, B.; Schmid, W.. Mathematics Unlimited — 2001 and beyond. Springer. pp. 919–936 (Part II).
    ^ Stone 1973:4
    ^ Stone simply requires that "it must terminate in a finite number of steps" (Stone 1973:7–8).
    ^ Boolos and Jeffrey 1974,1999:19
    ^ cf Stone 1972:5
    ^ Knuth 1973:7 states: "In practice we not only want algorithms, we want good agorithms ... one criterion of goodness is the length of time taken to perform the algorithm ... other criteria are the adaptability of the algorithm to computers, its simplicty and elegance, etc."
    ^ cf Stone 1973:6
    ^ Stone 1973:7–8 states that there must be "a procedure that a robot [i.e. computer] can follow in order to determine pecisely how to obey the instruction". Stone adds finiteness of the process, and definiteness (having no ambiguity in the instructions) to this definition.
    ^ Knuth, loc. cit
    ^ Minsky 1967:105
    ^ Gurevich 2000:1, 3
    ^ Sipser 2006:157
    ^ Knuth 1973:7
    ^ Chaitin 2005:32
    ^ Rogers 1987:1–2
    ^ In his essay "Calculations by Man and Machine: Conceptual Analysis" Seig 2002:390 credits this distinction to Robin Gandy, cf Wilfred Seig, et. al., 2002 Reflections on the foundations of mathematics: Essays in honor of Solomon Feferman, Association for Symbolic Logic, A. K Peters Ltd, Natick, MA.
    ^ cf Gandy 1980:126, Robin Gandy Church's Thesis and Principles for Mechanisms appearing on pp. 123–148 in J. Barwise et. al. 1980 The Kleene Symposium, North-Holland Publishing Company.
    ^ A "robot": "A computer is a robot that will perform any task that can be described as a sequence of instructions" cf Stone 1972:3
    ^ Lambek’s "abacus" is a "countably infinite number of locations (holes, wires etc.) together with an unlimited supply of counters (pebbles, beads, etc). The locations are distinguishable, the counters are not". The holes will have unlimited capacity, and standing by is an agent who understands and is able to carry out the list of instructions" (Lambek 1961:295). Lambek references Melzak who defines his Q-machine as "an indefinitely large number of locations . . . an indefinitely large supply of counters distributed among these locations, a program, and an operator whose sole purpose is to carry out the program" (Melzak 1961:283). B-B-J (loc. cit.) add the stipulation that the holes are "capable of holding any number of stones" (p. 46). Both Melzak and Lambek appear in The Canadian Mathematical Bulletin, vol. 4, no. 3, September 1961.
    ^ If no confusion will result, the word "counters" can be dropped, and a location can be said to contain a single "number".
    ^ "We say that an instruction is effective if there is a procedure that the robot can follow in order to determine precisely how to obey the instruction" (Stone 1972:6)
    ^ cf Minsky 1967: Chapter 11 "Computer models" and Chapter 14 "Very Simple Bases for Computability" pp. 255–281 in particular
    ^ cf Knuth 1973:3.
    ^ But always preceded by IF–THEN to avoid improper subtraction.
    ^ However, a few different assignment instructions (e.g. DECREMENT, INCREMENT and ZERO/CLEAR/EMPTY for a Minsky machine) are also required for Turing-completeness; their exact specification is somewhat up to the designer. The unconditional GOTO is a convenience; it can be constructed by initializing a dedicated location to zero e.g. the instruction " Z ? 0 "; thereafter the instruction IF Z=0 THEN GOTO xxx will be unconditional.
    ^ Knuth 1973:4
    ^ Stone 1972:5. Methods for extracting roots are not trivial: see Methods of computing square roots.
    ^ Cf page 875 in Peter van Emde Boas's "Machine Models and Simulation" in Jan van Leeuwen ed., 1990, "Handbook of Theoretical Computer Science. Volume A: algorithms and Compexity", The MIT Press/Elsevier, ISBN 0-444-88071-2 (Volume A).
    ^ John G. Kemeny and Thomas E. Kurtz 1985 Back to Basic: The History, Corruption, and Future of the Language, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Reading, MA, ISBN 0-201-13433-0.
    ^ Tausworthe 1977:101
    ^ Tausworthe 1977:142
    ^ Knuth 1973 section 1.2.1, expanded by Tausworthe 1977 at pages 100ff and Chapter 9.1
    ^ cf Tausworthe 1977
    ^ Heath 1908:300; Hawking’s Dover 2005 edition derives from Heath.
    ^ " 'Let CD, measuring BF, leave FA less than itself.' This is a neat abbreviation for saying, measure along BA successive lengths equal to CD until a point F is reached such that the length FA remaining is less than CD; in other words, let BF be the largest exact multiple of CD contained in BA" (Heath 1908:297
    ^ For modern treatments using division in the algorithm see Hardy and Wright 1979:180, Knuth 1973:2 (Volume 1), plus more discussion of Euclid's algorithm in Knuth 1969:293-297 (Volume 2).
    ^ Euclid covers this question in his Proposition 1.
    ^ "Euclid's Elements, Book VII, Proposition 2". Aleph0.clarku.edu. Retrieved 2012-05-20.
    ^ Knuth 1973:13–18. He credits "the formulation of algorithm-proving in terms of asertions and induction" to R. W. Floyd, Peter Naur, C. A. R. Hoare, H. H. Goldstine and J. von Neumann. Tausworth 1977 borrows Knuth's Euclid example and extends Knuth's method in section 9.1 Formal Proofs (pages 288–298).
    ^ Tausworthe 1997:294
    ^ cf Knuth 1973:7 (Vol. I), and his more-detailed analyses on pp. 1969:294-313 (Vol II).
    ^ Breakdown occurs when an algorithm tries to compact itself. Success would solve the Halting problem.
    ^ Haitham Hassanieh, Piotr Indyk, Dina Katabi, and Eric Price, "Simple and Practical Algorithm for Sparse Fourier Transform," ACM-SIAM Symposium On Discrete Algorithms (SODA), Kyoto, January 2012. See also the sFFT Web Page.
    ^ Kowalski 1979
    ^ Sue Carroll, Taz Daughtrey (2007-07-04). Fundamental Concepts for the Software Quality Engineer. pp. 282 et seq.. ISBN 978-0-87389-720-4.
    ^ Adaptation and learning in automatic systems, page 54, Ya. Z. Tsypkin, Z. J. Nikolic, Academic Press, 1971, ISBN 978-0-12-702050-1
    ^ Toomer 1990,[citation not found].
    ^ Hogendijk, Jan P. (1998). "al-Khwarzimi". Pythagoras 38 (2): 4–5.[dead link]
    ^ Oaks, Jeffrey A.. "Was al-Khwarizmi an applied algebraist?". University of Indianapolis. Retrieved 2008-05-30.
    ^ Al-Khwarizmi: The Inventor of Algebra, by Corona Brezina (2006)
    ^ Foremost mathematical texts in history, according to Carl B. Boyer.
    ^ Etymology of algorithm at Dictionary.Reference.com
    ^ Davis 2000:18
    ^ Bolter 1984:24
    ^ Bolter 1984:26
    ^ Bolter 1984:33–34, 204–206)
    ^ All quotes from W. Stanley Jevons 1880 Elementary Lessons in Logic: Deductive and Inductive, Macmillan and Co., London and New York. Republished as a googlebook; cf Jevons 1880:199–201. Louis Couturat 1914 the Algebra of Logic, The Open Court Publishing Company, Chicago and London. Republished as a googlebook; cf Couturat 1914:75–76 gives a few more details; interestingly he compares this to a typewriter as well as a piano. Jevons states that the account is to be found at Jan . 20, 1870 The Proceedings of the Royal Society.
    ^ Jevons 1880:199–200
    ^ All quotes from John Venn 1881 Symbolic Logic, Macmillan and Co., London. Republished as a googlebook. cf Venn 1881:120–125. The interested reader can find a deeper explanation in those pages.
    ^ Bell and Newell diagram 1971:39, cf. Davis 2000
    ^ * Melina Hill, Valley News Correspondent, A Tinkerer Gets a Place in History, Valley News West Lebanon NH, Thursday March 31, 1983, page 13.
    ^ Davis 2000:14
    ^ van Heijenoort 1967:81ff
    ^ van Heijenoort's commentary on Frege's Begriffsschrift, a formula language, modeled upon that of arithmetic, for pure thought in van Heijenoort 1967:1
    ^ Dixon 1906, cf. Kleene 1952:36–40
    ^ cf. footnote in Alonzo Church 1936a in Davis 1965:90 and 1936b in Davis 1965:110
    ^ Kleene 1935–6 in Davis 1965:237ff, Kleene 1943 in Davis 1965:255ff
    ^ Church 1936 in Davis 1965:88ff
    ^ cf. "Formulation I", Post 1936 in Davis 1965:289–290
    ^ Turing 1936–7 in Davis 1965:116ff
    ^ Rosser 1939 in Davis 1965:226
    ^ Kleene 1943 in Davis 1965:273–274
    ^ Kleene 1952:300, 317
    ^ Kleene 1952:376
    ^ Turing 1936–7 in Davis 1965:289–290
    ^ Turing 1936 in Davis 1965, Turing 1939 in Davis 1965:160
    ^ Hodges, p. 96
    ^ Turing 1936–7:116)
    ^ a b Turing 1936–7 in Davis 1965:136
    ^ Turing 1939 in Davis 1965:160

References

    Axt, P. (1959) On a Subrecursive Hierarchy and Primitive Recursive Degrees, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 92, pp. 85–105
    Bell, C. Gordon and Newell, Allen (1971), Computer Structures: Readings and Examples, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York. ISBN 0-07-004357-4}.
    Blass, Andreas; Gurevich, Yuri (2003). "Algorithms: A Quest for Absolute Definitions". Bulletin of European Association for Theoretical Computer Science 81. Includes an excellent bibliography of 56 references.
    Boolos, George; Jeffrey, Richard (1974, 1980, 1989, 1999). Computability and Logic (4th ed.). Cambridge University Press, London. ISBN 0-521-20402-X.: cf. Chapter 3 Turing machines where they discuss "certain enumerable sets not effectively (mechanically) enumerable".
    Burgin, M. Super-recursive algorithms, Monographs in computer science, Springer, 2005. ISBN 0-387-95569-0
    Campagnolo, M.L., Moore, C., and Costa, J.F. (2000) An analog characterization of the subrecursive functions. In Proc. of the 4th Conference on Real Numbers and Computers, Odense University, pp. 91–109
    Church, Alonzo (1936a). "An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory". The American Journal of Mathematics 58 (2): 345–363. doi:10.2307/2371045. JSTOR 2371045. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 89ff. The first expression of "Church's Thesis". See in particular page 100 (The Undecidable) where he defines the notion of "effective calculability" in terms of "an algorithm", and he uses the word "terminates", etc.
    Church, Alonzo (1936b). "A Note on the Entscheidungsproblem". The Journal of Symbolic Logic 1 (1): 40–41. doi:10.2307/2269326. JSTOR 2269326. Church, Alonzo (1936). "Correction to a Note on the Entscheidungsproblem". The Journal of Symbolic Logic 1 (3): 101–102. doi:10.2307/2269030. JSTOR 2269030. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 110ff. Church shows that the Entscheidungsproblem is unsolvable in about 3 pages of text and 3 pages of footnotes.
    Daffa', Ali Abdullah al- (1977). The Muslim contribution to mathematics. London: Croom Helm. ISBN 0-85664-464-1.
    Davis, Martin (1965). The Undecidable: Basic Papers On Undecidable Propositions, Unsolvable Problems and Computable Functions. New York: Raven Press. ISBN 0-486-43228-9. Davis gives commentary before each article. Papers of Gödel, Alonzo Church, Turing, Rosser, Kleene, and Emil Post are included; those cited in the article are listed here by author's name.
    Davis, Martin (2000). Engines of Logic: Mathematicians and the Origin of the Computer. New York: W. W. Nortion. ISBN 0-393-32229-7. Davis offers concise biographies of Leibniz, Boole, Frege, Cantor, Hilbert, Gödel and Turing with von Neumann as the show-stealing villain. Very brief bios of Joseph-Marie Jacquard, Babbage, Ada Lovelace, Claude Shannon, Howard Aiken, etc.
    Paul E. Black, algorithm at the NIST Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures.
    Dennett, Daniel (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80290-2.
    Yuri Gurevich, Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pages 77–111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
    Kleene C., Stephen (1936). "General Recursive Functions of Natural Numbers". Mathematische Annalen 112 (5): 727–742. doi:10.1007/BF01565439. Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 237ff. Kleene's definition of "general recursion" (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory that proved the "decision problem" to be "undecidable" (i.e., a negative result).
    Kleene C., Stephen (1943). "Recursive Predicates and Quantifiers". American Mathematical Society Transactions 54 (1): 41–73. doi:10.2307/1990131. JSTOR 1990131. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of "general recursion" and proceeded in his chapter "12. Algorithmic theories" to posit "Thesis I" (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it "Church's Thesis"(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
    Kleene, Stephen C. (First Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundamental Algorithms, Third Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89683-4.
    Knuth, Donald (1969). Volume 2/Seminumerical Algorithms, The Art of Computer Programming First Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.
    Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theory of Subrecursive Algorithms, LSU Publ., Leningrad, 19

    Paul E. Black, algorithm at the NIST Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures.
    Dennett, Daniel (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80290-2.
    Yuri Gurevich, Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pages 77–111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
    Kleene C., Stephen (1936). "General Recursive Functions of Natural Numbers". Mathematische Annalen 112 (5): 727–742. doi:10.1007/BF01565439. Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 237ff. Kleene's definition of "general recursion" (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory that proved the "decision problem" to be "undecidable" (i.e., a negative result).
    Kleene C., Stephen (1943). "Recursive Predicates and Quantifiers". American Mathematical Society Transactions 54 (1): 41–73. doi:10.2307/1990131. JSTOR 1990131. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of "general recursion" and proceeded in his chapter "12. Algorithmic theories" to posit "Thesis I" (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it "Church's Thesis"(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
    Kleene, Stephen C. (First Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundamental Algorithms, Third Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89683-4.
    Knuth, Donald (1969). Volume 2/Seminumerical Algorithms, The Art of Computer Programming First Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.
    Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theory of Subrecursive Algorithms, LSU Publ., Leningrad, 198181
    Paul E. Black, algorithm at the NIST Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures.
    Dennett, Daniel (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80290-2.
    Yuri Gurevich, Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pages 77–111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
    Kleene C., Stephen (1936). "General Recursive Functions of Natural Numbers". Mathematische Annalen 112 (5): 727–742. doi:10.1007/BF01565439. Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 237ff. Kleene's definition of "general recursion" (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory that proved the "decision problem" to be "undecidable" (i.e., a negative result).
    Kleene C., Stephen (1943). "Recursive Predicates and Quantifiers". American Mathematical Society Transactions 54 (1): 41–73. doi:10.2307/1990131. JSTOR 1990131. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of "general recursion" and proceeded in his chapter "12. Algorithmic theories" to posit "Thesis I" (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it "Church's Thesis"(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
    Kleene, Stephen C. (First Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundamental Algorithms, Third Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89683-4.
    Knuth, Donald (1969). Volume 2/Seminumerical Algorithms, The Art of Computer Programming First Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.
    Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theory of Subrecursive Algorithms, LSU Publ., Leningrad, 1981
Paul E. Black, algorithm at the NIST Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures.
    Dennett, Daniel (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80290-2.
    Yuri Gurevich, Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pages 77–111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
    Kleene C., Stephen (1936). "General Recursive Functions of Natural Numbers". Mathematische Annalen 112 (5): 727–742. doi:10.1007/BF01565439. Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 237ff. Kleene's definition of "general recursion" (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory that proved the "decision problem" to be "undecidable" (i.e., a negative result).
    Kleene C., Stephen (1943). "Recursive Predicates and Quantifiers". American Mathematical Society Transactions 54 (1): 41–73. doi:10.2307/1990131. JSTOR 1990131. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of "general recursion" and proceeded in his chapter "12. Algorithmic theories" to posit "Thesis I" (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it "Church's Thesis"(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
    Kleene, Stephen C. (First Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundamental Algorithms, Third Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89683-4.
    Knuth, Donald (1969). Volume 2/Seminumerical Algorithms, The Art of Computer Programming First Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.
    Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theory of Subrecursive Algorithms, LSU Publ., Leningrad, 198181
    Paul E. Black, algorithm at the NIST Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures.
    Dennett, Daniel (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80290-2.
    Yuri Gurevich, Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pages 77–111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
    Kleene C., Stephen (1936). "General Recursive Functions of Natural Numbers". Mathematische Annalen 112 (5): 727–742. doi:10.1007/BF01565439. Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 237ff. Kleene's definition of "general recursion" (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory that proved the "decision problem" to be "undecidable" (i.e., a negative result).
    Kleene C., Stephen (1943). "Recursive Predicates and Quantifiers". American Mathematical Society Transactions 54 (1): 41–73. doi:10.2307/1990131. JSTOR 1990131. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of "general recursion" and proceeded in his chapter "12. Algorithmic theories" to posit "Thesis I" (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it "Church's Thesis"(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
    Kleene, Stephen C. (First Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundamental Algorithms, Third Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89683-4.
    Knuth, Donald (1969). Volume 2/Seminumerical Algorithms, The Art of Computer Programming First Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.
    Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theo
Paul E. Black, algorithm at the NIST Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures.
    Dennett, Daniel (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80290-2.
    Yuri Gurevich, Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pages 77–111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
    Kleene C., Stephen (1936). "General Recursive Functions of Natural Numbers". Mathematische Annalen 112 (5): 727–742. doi:10.1007/BF01565439. Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 237ff. Kleene's definition of "general recursion" (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory that proved the "decision problem" to be "undecidable" (i.e., a negative result).
    Kleene C., Stephen (1943). "Recursive Predicates and Quantifiers". American Mathematical Society Transactions 54 (1): 41–73. doi:10.2307/1990131. JSTOR 1990131. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of "general recursion" and proceeded in his chapter "12. Algorithmic theories" to posit "Thesis I" (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it "Church's Thesis"(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
    Kleene, Stephen C. (First Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundamental Algorithms, Third Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89683-4.
    Knuth, Donald (1969). Volume 2/Seminumerical Algorithms, The Art of Computer Programming First Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.
    Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theory of Subrecursive Algorithms, LSU Publ., Leningrad, 198181
    Paul E. Black, algorithm at the NIST Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures.
    Dennett, Daniel (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80290-2.
    Yuri Gurevich, Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pages 77–111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
    Kleene C., Stephen (1936). "General Recursive Functions of Natural Numbers". Mathematische Annalen 112 (5): 727–742. doi:10.1007/BF01565439. Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 237ff. Kleene's definition of "general recursion" (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory that proved the "decision problem" to be "undecidable" (i.e., a negative result).
    Kleene C., Stephen (1943). "Recursive Predicates and Quantifiers". American Mathematical Society Transactions 54 (1): 41–73. doi:10.2307/1990131. JSTOR 1990131. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of "general recursion" and proceeded in his chapter "12. Algorithmic theories" to posit "Thesis I" (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it "Church's Thesis"(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
    Kleene, Stephen C. (First Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundamental Algorithms, Third Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89683-4.
    Knuth, Donald (1969). Volume 2/Seminumerical Algorithms, The Art of Computer Programming First Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.
    Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theo
Paul E. Black, algorithm at the NIST Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures.
    Dennett, Daniel (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80290-2.
    Yuri Gurevich, Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pages 77–111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
    Kleene C., Stephen (1936). "General Recursive Functions of Natural Numbers". Mathematische Annalen 112 (5): 727–742. doi:10.1007/BF01565439. Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 237ff. Kleene's definition of "general recursion" (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory that proved the "decision problem" to be "undecidable" (i.e., a negative result).
    Kleene C., Stephen (1943). "Recursive Predicates and Quantifiers". American Mathematical Society Transactions 54 (1): 41–73. doi:10.2307/1990131. JSTOR 1990131. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of "general recursion" and proceeded in his chapter "12. Algorithmic theories" to posit "Thesis I" (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it "Church's Thesis"(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
    Kleene, Stephen C. (First Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundamental Algorithms, Third Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89683-4.
    Knuth, Donald (1969). Volume 2/Seminumerical Algorithms, The Art of Computer Programming First Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.
    Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theory of Subrecursive Algorithms, LSU Publ., Leningrad, 198181
    Paul E. Black, algorithm at the NIST Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures.
    Dennett, Daniel (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80290-2.
    Yuri Gurevich, Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pages 77–111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
    Kleene C., Stephen (1936). "General Recursive Functions of Natural Numbers". Mathematische Annalen 112 (5): 727–742. doi:10.1007/BF01565439. Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 237ff. Kleene's definition of "general recursion" (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory that proved the "decision problem" to be "undecidable" (i.e., a negative result).
    Kleene C., Stephen (1943). "Recursive Predicates and Quantifiers". American Mathematical Society Transactions 54 (1): 41–73. doi:10.2307/1990131. JSTOR 1990131. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of "general recursion" and proceeded in his chapter "12. Algorithmic theories" to posit "Thesis I" (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it "Church's Thesis"(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
    Kleene, Stephen C. (First Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundamental Algorithms, Third Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89683-4.
    Knuth, Donald (1969). Volume 2/Seminumerical Algorithms, The Art of Computer Programming First Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.
    Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theoPaul E. Black, algorithm at the NIST Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures.
    Dennett, Daniel (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80290-2.Paul E. Black, algorithm at the NIST Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures.
    Dennett, Daniel (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80290-2.
    Yuri Gurevich, Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pages 77–111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
    Kleene C., Stephen (1936). "General Recursive Functions of Natural Numbers". Mathematische Annalen 112 (5): 727–742. doi:10.1007/BF01565439. Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 237ff. Kleene's definition of "general recursion" (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory that proved the "decision problem" to be "undecidable" (i.e., a negative result).
    Kleene C., Stephen (1943). "Recursive Predicates and Quantifiers". American Mathematical Society Transactions 54 (1): 41–73. doi:10.2307/1990131. JSTOR 1990131. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of "general recursion" and proceeded in his chapter "12. Algorithmic theories" to posit "Thesis I" (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it "Church's Thesis"(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
    Kleene, Stephen C. (First Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundamental Algorithms, Third Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89683-4.
    Knuth, Donald (1969). Volume 2/Seminumerical Algorithms, The Art of Computer Programming First Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.
    Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theory of Subrecursive Algorithms, LSU Publ., Leningrad, 198181
    Paul E. Black, algorithm at the NIST Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures.
    Dennett, Daniel (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80290-2.
    Yuri Gurevich, Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pages 77–111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
    Kleene C., Stephen (1936). "General Recursive Functions of Natural Numbers". Mathematische Annalen 112 (5): 727–742. doi:10.1007/BF01565439. Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 237ff. Kleene's definition of "general recursion" (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory that proved the "decision problem" to be "undecidable" (i.e., a negative result).
    Kleene C., Stephen (1943). "Recursive Predicates and Quantifiers". American Mathematical Society Transactions 54 (1): 41–73. doi:10.2307/1990131. JSTOR 1990131. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of "general recursion" and proceeded in his chapter "12. Algorithmic theories" to posit "Thesis I" (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it "Church's Thesis"(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
    Kleene, Stephen C. (First Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundamental Algorithms, Third Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89683-4.
    Knuth, Donald (1969). Volume 2/Seminumerical Algorithms, The Art of Computer Programming First Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.
    Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theo
    Yuri Gurevich, Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pages 77–111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
    Kleene C., Stephen (1936). "General Recursive Functions of Natural Numbers".  Kleene, Stephen C. (First Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundamental Algorithms, Third Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89683-4.
    Knuth, Donald (1969). Volume 2/Seminumerical Algorithms, The Art of Computer Programming First Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.
    Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the th Mathematische Annalen 112 (5): 727–742. doi:10.1007/BF01565439. Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 237ff. Kleene's definition of "general recursion" (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory that proved the "decision problem" to be "undecidable" (i.e., a negative result).
    Kleene C., Stephen (1943). "Recursive Predicates and Quantifiers". American Mathematical Society Transactions 54 (1): 41–73. doi:10.2307/1990131. JSTOR 1990131. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of "general recursion" and proceeded in his chapter "12. Algorithmic theories" to posit "Thesis I" (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it "Church's Thesis"(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
    Kleene, Stephen C. (First Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundamental Algoritrst Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundahms, Third Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89683-4.
    Knuth, Donald (1969). Volume 2/Seminumerical Algorithms, The Art of Computer Programming First Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.
    Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theory of Subrecursive Algorithms, LSU Publ., Leningrad, 198181
    Paul E. Black, algorithmck, algorithm at the NIST Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures.
    Dennett, Daniel (19 at  Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997)rst Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundarst Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Funda. Funda Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures.
    Dennett, Daniel (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80290-2.
    Yuri Gurevich, Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pages 77–111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
    Kleene C., Stephen (1936). "General Recursive Functions of Natural Numbers". Mathematische Annalen 112 (5): 727–742. doi:10.1007/BF01565439. Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 237ff. Kleene's definition of "general recursion" (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory that proved the "decision problem" to be "undecidable" (i.e., a negative result).
    Kleene C., Stephen (1943). "Recursive Predicates and Quantifiers". American Mathematical Society Transactions 54 (1): 41–73. doi:10.2307/1990131. JSTOR 1990131. Reprinted in The Undecidable, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of "general recursion" and proceeded in his chapter "12. Algorithmic theories" to posit "Thesis I" (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it "Church's Thesis"(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
    Kleene, Stephen C. (First Edition 1952). Introduction to Metamathematics (Tenth Edition 1991 ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company. ISBN 0-7204-2103-9. Excellent—accessible, readable—reference source for mathematical "foundations".
    Knuth, Donald (1997). Fundamental Algorithms, Third Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89683-4.
    Knuth, Donald (1969). Volume 2/Seminumerical Algorithms, The Art of Computer Programming First Edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison–Wesley.
    Kosovsky, N. K. Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theo